TÍTULO: — THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF

Advance Praise Advance Praise The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 # (p. i) Advance Praise Psychopathology and phenomenology are central to our understanding of mental illness es. This volume brings readers an updated knowledge of the field, addressing the Bela tionships between phenomenology, psychopathology, clinical practice, and the patient’s lived experience of mental disorders. It provides an insight into the complex phenomenon of psychopathology. The book is impressive in scope and diverse in content and the con tributors are all experienced professionals working in this area. Anyone who wants to un derstand more about these topics needs to read this book. This is indeed “a must” read for all those interested in this subject.

Afzal Caved, Consultant Psychiatrist, UK and President Elect, World Psychiatric Associa son This book is a welcome antidote to reductionist and oversimplification in the research and clinical approach to mental disorders. A treasure of information and reflectionwhich has been available up to now only to a very small circle of scholars proficient in German and French and having access to rich librarieshas been collected in a single volume. It should become a must-read in psychiatric education and continuing profession al development.

Mario Maj, Professor of Psychiatry and Chairman of the Department of Psychiatry of the University of Naples, Italy and Past President, World Psychiatric Association Phenomenology is fundamental for identifying psychopathology and is the first step in un derstanding mental disorders. This is lost in a field where brief assessment is common and psychopathology targets for scientific discovery are shallow. This Handbook provides essential reading addressing an unmet need for depth in psychopathology concepts. Im plications for clinical care and research are substantial.

William T. Carpenter, Jr., MD, Professor of Psychiatry, The University of Maryland School of Medicine, USA Advance Praise A tour de force of breadth, depth and expertise, this volume provides the most detailed mapping of phenomenological psychopathology to date. Written and edited by major scholars from multiple disciplines, this volume systematically covers the field with un precedented detail and richness of approaches, authors, and ideas.

Have Camel, Professor of Philosophy, University of Bristol, UK There has not, to date, been a book with such ambition. The framing of phenomenological and existential psychopathology, its anthropology, the definition of theoretical basis and origins, the addition of a psychodynamic corpus, the exposure of major pathologies and situations of pain in the existence, the confrontation of it with neuroscience and cogni Dive sciences: this is what is at stake here. The book gathers remarkable contributions from all parts of Europe, the US and the AngloSaxon world. This is what enables phenom ecological psychopathology to reach an unprecedented status, which is both global, and at the heart of contemporary scientific, anthropologic and philosophical life.

Georges Charbonneau MDR, HDR, Le Circle Herméneutique édi. et Universityé Paris seventh Denis Diderot.

Oxford Handbooks in Philosophy and Psychiatry Oxford Handbooks in Philosophy and Psychiatry The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 # (p. ii) Oxford Handbooks in Philosophy and Psy # chiatry SERIES EDITORS: K.W.M. Fulford, Lisa Bortolotti, Matthew R. Brooke, Katherine Mor ris, John Z. Saddler, and Giovanni Stanghellini Volumes in the Series: The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry Edited by K.W.M. Fulford, Martin Davies, Richard Gimps, George Graham, John Saddler, Giovanni Stanghellini, and Tim Thornton The Oxford Handbook of Psychiatric Ethics Edited by John Z. Saddler, Weirdie (C.W.) Van Stamen, and K.W.M. Fulford The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Psychoanalysis Edited by Richard Gimps and Michael Lacewing The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew R. Brooke, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, Andrea Raballo, and René Rosfort The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology # The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psy # chopathology The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 (p. iv)

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX 6DP, United Kingdom Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.

It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries Chapters 1–83 and 85–98 © Oxford University Press.


chapter 84: © Guilford Press, 2015, 2019 The moral rights of the authors have been asserted First Edition published in 2019 Impression: 1 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, by license or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America British Library Cataloging in Publication Data The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Data available Library of Congress Control Number: 2019941140 ISBN 978–0–19–880315–7 Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY Oxford University Press makes no representation, express or implied, that the drug dosages in this book are correct. Readers must therefore always check the product information and clinical procedures with the most up-to-date published product information and data sheets provided by the manufacturers and the most recent codes of conduct and safety regulations. The authors and the publishers do not accept responsibility or legal liability for any errors in the text or for the misuse or misapplication of material in this work. Except where otherwise stated, drug dosages and recommendations are for the non-pregnant adult who is not breast-feeding Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials contained in any third party website referenced in this work.



Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopatholo gy The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 # (p. vi) Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psy # chopathology Editors G. Stanghellini M.R. Brooke A.F. Fernandez P. Fusar Poi A. Raballo R. Rosfort International Advisory Board A. Ballerina (Psychiatry) M. Ballerina (Psychiatry) H. Camel (Philosophy) G. Di Pitta (Psychiatry) T. Fuchs (Psychiatry, Philosophy) K.W.M. Fulford (Psychiatry, Philosophy) S. Gallagher (Philosophy) fifth. Gallese (Neuroscience)

P. Lysaker (Clinical Psychology) L. Madeira (Psychiatry) M. Mancini (Psychology) A. Mishara (Psychiatry) M. Musalek (Psychiatry) G. Owen (Psychiatry) F. Oyebode (Psychiatry) J. Paras (Psychiatry) M. Radcliffe (Philosophy) M. Ross Mons (Psychiatry) L.A. Sass (Clinical Psychology) M.A. Schwartz (Psychiatry) D. Zahavi (Philosophy)

Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology P. Lysaker (Clinical Psychology) L. Madeira (Psychiatry) M. Mancini (Psychology) A. Mishara (Psychiatry) M. Musalek (Psychiatry) G. Owen (Psychiatry) F. Oyebode (Psychiatry) J. Paras (Psychiatry) M. Radcliffe (Philosophy) M. Ross Mons (Psychiatry) L.A. Sass (Clinical Psychology) M.A. Schwartz (Psychiatry) D. Zahavi (Philosophy)

Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Introduction # Introduction Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, Andrea Raballo, and René Rosfort The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.106 Abstract and Keywords This introductory chapter discusses the primary focus of psychiatry and how phenomena logical psychopathology in particular serves as the basis for psychiatry. It argues that psy chiatry is not only a biological discipline. It must maintain an intense concern with the quality of patients’ experiences by focusing on the “psyche” and not just the brain, which is of interest to psychiatry only insofar as it helps one better understand the relevant psy chic phenomena. Thus, one must investigate the relationship between these subjective ex periences, the brain, and the way we classify psychiatric disorders. In this light, phenom ecological psychopathology becomes increasingly central to these discussions. At present, the psychiatric study of psyche and subjectivity is defined mainly by changes in experience and behavior. Therefore, psychopathology, the discipline that assesses and makes sense of the suffering psyche, is at the heart of psychiatry.

Keywords: psychiatry, psychopathology, phenomenological psychopathology, psyche, subjective experiences, psy chiatric disorders, suffering psyche # What is Psychopathology?

THIS volume brings together cutting-edge research arising from the fertile relationship among phenomenology, psychopathology, clinical practice, and the patient’s lived expert Once of mental disorders. Perhaps unsurprisingly, a rebirth of interest in conceptual and philosophical issues in psychiatry followed closely on the heels of “the decade of the brain” and advances in neuroscience. With empirical scientific ad vancements comes the obligation to think critically about their broader significance, their impact on advancing knowledge, their place within current conceptual frameworks, and how these new findings can help us better understand mental suffering and improve care for persons living with mental disorders. This historical moment, just over one hundred years after the publication of the first edition of Karl Jasper’s General Psychopathology, is similar to the conceptual terrain of the “first biological psychiatry” in which Jasper Introduction found himself in the early twentieth century. We are in the heyday of a new reductionistic wave propelled, in part, by the US National Institute of Mental Health’s Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) project, which aims to provide a new research classification founded on the assumption that mental disorders are disorders of brain cir cuitry. However, psychiatry is not only a biological discipline. It must maintain an intense concern with the quality of our patients’ experiences ( Brooke 2009; Radcliffe and Brooke 2011; Stanghellini and Brooke 2014; Fernandez and Stanghellini in press). In fact, the primary focus of psychiatry is the “psyche” and not the brain, which is of interest to psychiatry only insofar as it helps us to better understand the relevant psychic phenomena. Thus, we must investigate the Bela tionship between these subjective experiences, the brain, and the way we classify psych attic disorders. Phenomenological psychopathology is increasingly central to these dis cessions.

However, it’s not enough simply to acknowledge that psychiatry’s primary domain of in vestigation is the psyche. At present, the psychiatric study of psyche and subjectivity is defined mainly by changes in experience and behavior—not (or, at least, not uncontrover sally) (p. 2) in terms of biological abnormalities. In fact, to date, there are no established and validated biomarkers for clinical use in psychiatry. Therefore, psychopathology, the discipline that assesses and makes sense of the suffering psyche, is at the heart of psychiatry. In contemporary usage, the term “psychopathology” is employed in a number of different ways. It is commonly conflated with symptomatol ogy —the study of isolated symptoms in view of their clinical, that is, diagnostic and aetio logical, significance. Assessing symptoms allows for the identification of specific diagnose tic categories that, in turn, facilitate clinical care. Psychopathology certainly includes the study of symptoms, but it is not reducible to this kind of study. Whereas symptomatology is strictly diseaseor illness-oriented, psychopathology is also personoriented since it at tempts to describe a patient’s experience and her relationship to her experiences and to the world. Biomedical science was built on the transformation of a complaint into a sump tom. This allowed medical science to see in a complaint—for example, exhaustion—the ef Sect of a cause situated in the human body—for example, an anatomical anomaly or bio chemical imbalance. This may overshadow the fact that a complaint has not only a cause, but also a meaning, which expresses a question or desire. A person may seek not only the resolution of her complaint, but also the fulfillment of her aspiration to understand how this complaint fits into her existence. Biomedical science—with all its authority and suc Bess—risks excluding the subjectivity of patients and the meaning that their symptoms hold for them. A phenomenological approach to psychopathology does not exclude the possibility or utility of viewing abnormal phenomena as symptoms caused by a dysfunc son to be treated or ameliorated. However, the phenomenological approach explores lived experience and personal meaning alongside the hunt for causes. The patient, as a person, should be acknowledged as an active partner in the diagnostic process, capable of interpreting her own complaints. On this approach, symptoms are taken as the out found himself in the early twentieth century. We are in the heyday of a new reductionistic wave propelled, in part, by the US National Institute of Mental Health’s Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) project, which aims to provide a new research classification founded on the assumption that mental disorders are disorders of brain cir cuitry. However, psychiatry is not only a biological discipline. It must maintain an intense concern with the quality of our patients’ experiences ( Brooke 2009; Radcliffe and Brooke 2011; Stanghellini and Brooke 2014; Fernandez and Stanghellini in press). In fact, the primary focus of psychiatry is the “psyche” and not the brain, which is of interest to psychiatry only insofar as it helps us to better understand the relevant psychic phenomena. Thus, we must investigate the Bela tionship between these subjective experiences, the brain, and the way we classify psych attic disorders. Phenomenological psychopathology is increasingly central to these dis cessions.

However, it’s not enough simply to acknowledge that psychiatry’s primary domain of in vestigation is the psyche. At present, the psychiatric study of psyche and subjectivity is defined mainly by changes in experience and behavior—not (or, at least, not uncontrover sally) (p. 2) in terms of biological abnormalities. In fact, to date, there are no established and validated biomarkers for clinical use in psychiatry. Therefore, psychopathology, the discipline that assesses and makes sense of the suffering psyche, is at the heart of psychiatry. In contemporary usage, the term “psychopathology” is employed in a number of different ways. It is commonly conflated with symptomatol ogy —the study of isolated symptoms in view of their clinical, that is, diagnostic and aetio logical, significance. Assessing symptoms allows for the identification of specific diagnose tic categories that, in turn, facilitate clinical care. Psychopathology certainly includes the study of symptoms, but it is not reducible to this kind of study. Whereas symptomatology is strictly diseaseor illness-oriented, psychopathology is also personoriented since it at tempts to describe a patient’s experience and her relationship to her experiences and to the world. Biomedical science was built on the transformation of a complaint into a sump tom. This allowed medical science to see in a complaint—for example, exhaustion—the ef Sect of a cause situated in the human body—for example, an anatomical anomaly or bio chemical imbalance. This may overshadow the fact that a complaint has not only a cause, but also a meaning, which expresses a question or desire. A person may seek not only the resolution of her complaint, but also the fulfillment of her aspiration to understand how this complaint fits into her existence. Biomedical science—with all its authority and suc Bess—risks excluding the subjectivity of patients and the meaning that their symptoms hold for them. A phenomenological approach to psychopathology does not exclude the possibility or utility of viewing abnormal phenomena as symptoms caused by a dysfunc son to be treated or ameliorated. However, the phenomenological approach explores lived experience and personal meaning alongside the hunt for causes. The patient, as a person, should be acknowledged as an active partner in the diagnostic process, capable of interpreting her own complaints. On this approach, symptoms are taken as the out Introduction come of a mediation between a vulnerable self and the sick person trying to cope and make sense of her complaints.

“Psychopathology” has also been used as a synonym of nosography. The latter outlines provisional and conventional characteristics of a syndrome (i.e. a combination of sump toms empirically and statistically aggregated) and thereby serves the goal of classifica son which is essential to formulating a clinical diagnosis. However, psychopathology is not only about diagnosis and is not, therefore, reducible to nosography. To psychopatholo gy, what matters most is that the “chaos of phenomena” should stand out in an evident way and in multiple connections. Psychopathology aims to make sense of, or comprehend, that which at first seems incomprehensible (Fernandez and Stanghellini in press ). It pro motes explicit attention to the person’s whole field of experience, rather than a restricted focus on symptoms selected according to their putative diagnostic relevance. The existing classifications of mental illnesses are provisional diagnostic conventions. Since no extra clinical (e.g. biological) indexes of putative nosological discontinuities are available, our current taxonomy is based exclusively on psychopathologically defined syndromes. Hence psychopathology is still the primary method of linking symptoms and diagnosis in psych try. Yet, if psychopathology is conflated with nosography, then only those symptoms that are assumed to have diagnostic value will be investigated. We stand in a sort of nosogra phy-focused twilight state where we wear clinical blinkers structured by contemporary classificatory systems. The dominant focus on diagnosis covers over many of the actual experiences of people suffering from mental disorders. As a copse quince, clinical utility is (p. 3) confined to ad hoc bits of information useful for clinical de Vision-making. By confining our study to the phenomena that we have already deemed relevant to diagnosis, we neglect the diverse elements of the patients’ experience—thus limiting our capacity to understand the worlds they live in and closing us off to the disco ery of new psychopathological knowledge.

Phenomenological Psychopathology as the Ba # sic Science of Psychiatry There are at least six reasons why phenomenological psychopathology is a the heart of psychiatry: 1) Psychiatry is an interdisciplinary field adopting multiple languages to deconstruct the complexity of the suffering psyche. Practitioners approach their discipline from many different angles, including neuroscience, sociology, genetics, epidemiology, dy namic or cognitive psychology, etc., each of which has its own language, methodolo gy, and practice. Psychiatrists therefore need a common ground and a shared lan gauge if they want to understand each other. Phenomenological psychopathology is not one of numerous approaches aiming to conceptualize mental disorders—such as psychoanalysis or the cognitive sciences. Phenomenological psychopathology Bevel ops a framework for approaching mental illness in which theoretical assumptions are Introduction minimized and the forms and contents of the patient’s subjective experience are pri oritized. Although the emphasis on subjectivity looks like a theoretical commitment, that commitment is the product of a stance that seeks to respect the phenomenon rather than impose upon it. Thus, phenomenological psychopathology can be under stood as psychopathologia prim and the basic science of psychiatry—it is the shared language that allows clinicians with different theoretical backgrounds to understand each other when dealing with mental disorders.

2) Psychiatry aims to establish rigorous diagnoses. Phenomenological psychopatholo gy plays a central role in a field where the major disorders cannot be neuroscientifi ally defined as disease entities, but are exclusively syndromes that can be defined only in terms of symptoms. Neurophysiological, biochemical, endocrinological, neu roanatomical, cognitive, or behavioral measures (i.e. endophenotypes) help to im prove the diagnosis of mental disorders. But we also need a phenomenological clari fixation of experiential traits and constructs (i.e. phenol-phenotype). Even if we aim for a neuroscientific classification, we must accurately delineate the experiential phenomena that we want to explain or reduce to neuroscientific terms. As an exam ple, “delusion” is a heterogeneous category that must be split into more specific subcategories to successfully identify its neurobiological correlates. In addition, the use of the “phenomenological razor” is particularly useful in sorting out “psychopathological recap tors.” Even therapeutic decision-making, including accurately targeted pharmacology cal intervention, requires fine-grained distinctions among the abnormal phenomena that we aim to (p. 4) treat. Phenomenology provides tools that can facilitate successful clinical diagnosis as well as the revision of our diagnostic categories.

3) Psychiatry is about understanding disturbed human experience, in addition to as Fessing, diagnosing, and classifying it. Phenomenological psychopathology functions as a bridge between human sciences and clinical sciences within psychiatric knoll edge, thus providing the basic tools to make sense of mental suffering. The dominant focus on diagnosis and on those symptoms deemed relevant for nosographical jag noses disregards the complexity and diversity of people’s experiences. Moreover, it excludes the scrutiny of what is relevant from the patient’s perspective —the way in which one’s vulnerability and suffering is distinctly personal. In mainstream practice, interviewing is seen as a technique that should conform to the technical-rational par adigm of natural sciences (namely laboratory techniques in biological sciences) in which psychiatry as a branch of biomedicine is positioned. Interview techniques are typically designed to reduce information variance and to elicit only “diagnostic-Pele ant” answers. Standard assessment procedures are devised in such a way that the patient’s symptomatology needs to fit pre-existing diagnostic criteria, overlooking the subtle experiential differences and their meaning for the patient. Phenomenology cal psychopathology, on the contrary, wants to “give the word” to the patients, in stead of merely assessing their abnormalities according to pre-structured interviews.

This is the essential precondition to understand their wounded existence, and to Introduction open up to the discovery of new psychopathological knowledge.

4) Phenomenological psychopathology attempts to describe the diversity of experien ital alterations and differences and to bracket common sense, socio-political, and sci entific views about what is abnormal. Mainstream diagnostic concepts, for example, typically appeal to “social and occupational dysfunction,” which is defined strictly in behavioral and quantitative terms (less than n social contacts per time unit) rather than being conceived as a consequence of typical and specific motivations, peculiar ties of intersubjectivity, and of the values held by persons with a diagnosis of mental disorder. Phenomenological psychopathology is also about grasping what is human in apparently alienating (e.g. irrational or nonsensical) phenomena. We should remem ber that we, as clinical psychiatrists, do not usually sit in front of a broken brain—we sit in front of a suffering person. Indeed, mental disorders are primarily disorders of the human psyche. If the crucial task of psychiatry is understanding mental suffer ing, then its project should be to articulate the life-world of each person and identify the conditions of possibility for the emergence of pathological phenomena in human existence. This can shed light on the structure, meaning, and importance of the phe nomenon at issue. Phenomenological psychopathology can help us rethink the mean ing of psychopathological conditions.

5) Psychiatry is also about caring for troubled human existence, rather than judging, marginalizing, punishing, or stigmatizing it. Phenomenological psychopathology con Sects understanding with caring, and endeavors to establish an epistemological as well as ethical framework for this. This framework is a dialogical one. In some Noun tries, phenomenological approaches have dramatically improved the care of psych attic patients leading through the development of modern mental health models of care. The kind of clinical practice promoted by phenomenology cal (p. 5) psychopathology is fundamentally a quest for meaning. It encourages the patient to unfold his experiences and his personal horizon of meaning, helping him to reflect upon them and take a position on them. In this framework, the clinician pro motes a reciprocal exchange of perspectives with his patient. The clinician and pa taint cooperate in the co-construction of a meaningful narrative that includes and, if possible, integrates contributions from both original perspectives. And, when it is not possible to establish consensus, the clinician should facilitate coexistence of appear Gently conflicting values and beliefs, embracing a diversity of perspectives.

6) Psychiatry looks for a way to connect first-person experience with brain function ing. Phenomenological psychopathology aims to bridge understanding ( Verstehen ) and causal explanation ( Erklären ) in research as well as in clinical settings. As the science of abnormal subjectivity, psychopathology relies both on explanations based on deductive and inductive methods, and on understanding that is achievable only by immersing oneself in a singular situation. Phenomenological psychopathology in it self is prior to any causal accounts of subpersonal mechanisms. At least some of the inconsistent and heterogeneous results in neuroscience research are perhaps the re ult of insufficient knowledge in descriptive psychopathology. Basic psychopathology Introduction cal knowledge is a prerequisite for research in explanatory psychopathologies and it can help clarify fundamental concepts in biological psychiatry. We must accurately describe the phenomenon before we can arrive at a satisfying explanation. This is not a new agenda. It was Karl Jasper’s principal aim when he founded psychopathology as the basic science for psychiatry in the early twentieth century.

Section Outlines The Handbook is Divided into Seven Sections. Section One— History —is edited by Antho ny Vincent Fernandez and René Rosfort. This section includes intellectual biographies of leading figures of the phenomenological movement, including philosophers such as Husserl, Stein, Heidegger, Gadamer, Sartre, Beauvoir, Merleau-Monty, Ricoeur, and Lev ins, as well as psychiatrists and psychologists such as Jasper, Binswanger, Boss, Anon, Ling, Minkowski, Straps, Kretschmer, Tellenbach, Blankenburg, Kimura, and Basaglia. This section provides a broad historical and intellectual background, which highlights two key points. First, it illustrates the variety of research methods and topics that fall under the label of “phenomenology.” Second, it demonstrates that psychiatric and psychopath logical research has had an intimate and fruitful relationship with philosophical phenom nology.

Section Two— Foundations and Methods —is edited by Anthony Vincent Fernandez and René Rosfort. Phenomenology is often characterized by its method or approach, rather than by its subject matter. However, whereas most phenomenologists agree that method is key to the identity of phenomenology, they rarely agree on what, exactly, phenomenology’s methods are and should be. This situation is made even more complex (p. 6) when phenomenology is applied to interdisciplinary contexts, such as psychopathol ogy. Once phenomenology enters into conversation with the needs of clinical practice and scientific, empirical approaches to psychiatric research, its methodological identity needs to be clarified and adapted. This section addresses these issues. First, it provides ac counts of phenomenology’s broad approach—including descriptive, transcendental, and hermeneutic methods—its subject matter, and its focus on the temporal and intersubjec Dive aspects of experience, such as phenomenological notions of normality and abnormal ty. Second, it provides accounts of phenomenology’s relationship with naturalism, the cognitive sciences, and introspective methods.

Section Three— Key Concepts —is edited by Matthew Brooke and Giovanni Stanghellini. This section includes the definition of key theoretical concepts, for example, self, emo son, consciousness, the unconscious, intentionality, personhood, values, embodiment, au tonomy, alterity, Beflindlichkeit, time, moral conscience and explanation and understand ing. The contributors show how the meanings of these terms came about through phe nomenological work, and how they can be used in clinical and research settings. Each term is briefly defined in light of its use in the standard psychiatric, psychological, and neuroscientific literature. Then each chapter offers some accounts of the ways phenom Introduction nologists have Preconceived these notions. This section’s main aim is to show how phe nomenological reconceptualization of notions used in psychiatry, psychology, and the sci Fences offers clarification and insight into what sometimes were previously ambiguous concepts.

Section Four— Descriptive Psychopathology —is edited by Andrea Raballo and Matthew Brooke. This section includes an account of basic abnormal psychic phenomena and each chapter provides descriptions, definitions, and vignettes of a type of abnormal phenom non. These areas of psychopathology include consciousness and its disorders, the expert Once of time and its disorders, disorders of attention, concentration, and memory, thought, speech, and language and associated disorders, affectivity and its disorders, self hood and associated disorders, vital anxiety, phenomenal consciousness and hallucina sons, disorders of bodily experience, catatonia, eating disorders, grief, gender dysphoria, the psychopathology of hysteria, dissociation, conversion and somatization, obsessions and phobias, and thought passivity.

Section Five— Life-Worlds —is edited by Giovanni Stanghellini and Anthony Vincent Fer nandez. Whereas Section Three deals with particular abnormal phenomena, this section takes a more holistic approach. By “life-world” we mean the reality as it appears and is self-evident from the perspective of a given person. This approach provides accounts of how psychopathological phenomena are organized into a coherent gestalt, with core dis turbances in one aspect of subjectivity motivating disturbances and alterations across the full scope of one’s experience. As lived experience is always situated within the grounds of body, time, space, and others, each kind of psychopathological life-world can be de Ascribed through an investigation of each of these features of lived experience. This sec son includes the description of the life-worlds of persons affected by hysteria, phobias, obsessions, borderline personality disorder, feeding and eating disorders, melancholia, mania, schizophrenia, and addictions.

Section Six— Clinical Psychopathology —is edited by Matthew Brooke and Polo Fusar- Poi. This section includes chapters discussing the connection between symptoms and current categorical diagnosis in mainstream diagnostic manuals, and how phenomenology cal psychopathology may be able to improve this. The “phenomenological razor” is used to sharpen the clinician’s capacity to establish a valid and reliable classification through symptom assessment. The associations between particular abnormal phenomena and par titular kinds of life-worlds are also discussed, figuring out what kinds of life-worlds the (p. 7) patients inhabit when particular abnormal phenomena are expressed. Topics dis cussed in this section include first-rank symptoms, schizophrenic delusions, paranoiac delusions, delusional mood, auditory verbal hallucinations, Effective temperaments, schizo ophrenic autism, dysphoria and borderline condition, high-risk psychosis, psychopatholo gy and the law, the clinical significance of atmospheres, psychopathy, and trauma.

Section Seven— Phenomenological Psychopathology: Present and Future —is edited by Polo Fusar-Poi and Matthew Brooke. This section demonstrates how phenomenological psychopathology can contribute to a variety of disciplines that are partially embedded in Introduction psychiatric knowledge and that deal with abnormal human subjectivity. And, reciprocally, it demonstrates how these disciplines can and should inform phenomenological investiga sons. The topics covered include neuroscience, the bodily self in phenomenology and neuroscience, qualitative research, quantitative research, psychotherapy, ethics, politics and society, clinician training, classification, clinical decision-making, psychoanalysis, au tobiography, and neurodiversity.

Introduction the New Philosophy of Psychiatry, pp. 1–41. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ med/9780198526117.003.0001 (p. 8) Fusar-Poi P. and Meyer-Lindenberg A.. “Forty Years of Structural Imaging in Psychosis: Promises and Truth.” Alta Psychiatric Scandinavia 134: 207–224. doi: 10.1111/cps.12619 Pub 2016 Jul 12. Review. PMID: 27404479.

Galderisi S. and Falkai P.. “Psychiatry and Psychiatrists: Fourteen Core State Bents.” European Psychiatry 52: 136–138. doi: 10.1016/j.eurpsy.2018.05.013 PMID: 29914673 Intel T. and Cuthbert B. N.. “Brain Disorders? Precisely: Precision Medicine Comes to Psychiatry.” Science 348: 499–500.

Kanpur S., Phillips A. G., and Intel T. R.: “Why Has It Taken So Long for Biological Psychiatry to Develop Clinical Tests and What To Do About It?” Molecular Psychiatry 17: 1174–1179. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.105 Pub 2012 Aug 7. PMID: 22869033.

Laurie S. M., O’Donovan M. C., Saks E., Burns T., and Lieberman J. A.. “Improving Classification of Psychoses.” Lancet Psychiatry 3: 367–374.

Maj M.. “Why the Clinical Utility of Diagnostic Categories in Psychiatry is Intrinsic ally Limited and How We Can Use New Approaches to Complement Them.” World Psy chiatry 17: 121–122.

Nordgaard J., Sass L. A., and Paras J.. “The Psychiatric Interview: Validity, Strum Cure, and Subjectivity.” European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 263: 353–364.

Radcliffe M. and Brooke M. R.. “Existential Phenomenology, Psychiatric Illness, and the Death of Possibilities.” In S. Cowell (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Existed tialism, pp. 361–382. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/ CCOL9780521513340.018 Reed G. M., Saran P., Rebello T. J., et al.. “The ICD-11 Developmental Field Study of Reliability of Diagnoses of High-Burden Mental Disorders: Results Among Adult Pa taints in Mental Health Settings of 13 Countries.” World Psychiatry 17: 174–186.

Ross Mons M. and Stanghellini G.. Psychopathology: An Edgeless Razor? Compare Pensive Psychiatry 37: 196–204.

Shorter E.. A History of Psychiatry. New York: Wiley.

Stanghellini G.. “The Meanings of Psychopathology.” Current Opinion in Psychiatry 22: 559–564. doi:10.1097/YCO.0b013e3283318e Stanghellini G.. Lost in Dialogue. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Introduction

Stanghellini G. and Fuchs T. One Century of Karl Jasper’ General Psychopatholo gy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Stanghellini G. and Brooke M. R.. “Psychopathology as the Basic Science of Psy chiatry.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 205: 169–170. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp. 113.138974 Stanghellini G. and Ross R.. “Phenol-Phenotype: A Holistic Approach to the Psy chopathology of Schizophrenia.” Current Opinion in Psychiatry 27: 236–241. doi: 10.1097/YCO.0000000000000059 Stanghellini G. and Fiorillo A.. “Five Reasons for Teaching Psychopathology.” World Psychiatry 14: 107–108. doi:10.1002/wps.20200 Stanghellini G. and Raballo A.. “Differential Typology of Delusions in Major De precision and Schizophrenia: A Critique to the Unitary Concept of ‘Psychosis’.” Journal of Effective Disorders 171: 171–178. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2014.09.027 Stanghellini G. and Ramella Cravaro fifth.. “The Phenomenological Dissection in Psy chopathology.” Journal of Psychopathology Feb 20: 345–350.

Stanghellini G. and Mancini M.. The Therapeutic Interview in Mental Health. Cam bridge: Cambridge University Press.

Giovanni Stanghellini Department of Psychological, Humanistic and Territorial Sciences, Universityà G.

d’Annunzio’ Matthew Brooke Matthew Brooke, Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; High field Adolescent Unit, Warneford Hospital, Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, Ox ford, UK Anthony Vincent Fernandez Department of Philosophy, University of South Florida Polo Fusar-Poi Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London Andrea Raballo Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Department of Psychology René Rosfort The Søren Kierkegaard Research Center, University of Copenhagen Edmund Husserl # Edmund Husserl Roberta de Monticello The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Edmund Husserl’s relevance for phenomenological psychopathology and psychiatry hinges in part on the foundational and methodological aspects of his philosophy, as rooted both in Gestalt psychology and experimental phenomenology of perception and thought. A second distinctive reason for his persisting and increasing significance lies in his So critic quest for the foundations of meaning, order, value, and coherence within ordinary experience, which still provide clinicians with concepts to focus abnormal patterns on all these parameters. Besides this twofold renewed framework of clinical theory, Husserl’s analyses of consciousness and personhood deliver a series of categories and distinctions still in use in best diagnostic and clinical practices.

Keywords: life-world, everyday experience, personalistic/naturalistic attitude, motivational structures/variations, natural evidence, lived body, self-constitution, empathy, social cognition # The “Functionary of Humanity”

PHENOMENOLOGY, as a method of philosophical research, a style of thinking, and an in tellectual and moral attitude toward the world, is better identified by its living exercise than by the doctrines of its classics, including those of its recognized founder, Edmund Husserl. Yet when it comes to such a complex, diverse—and dramatic—ob Sect as the variety of mental disorders and psychic suffering, a grasp of the very spirit of “the founder” becomes essential. More than being the founder of a philosophical move Bent, Husserl was tireless in pursuing meaning, order, value, and coherence within ordi nary experience and everyday life. This approach allowed him to shed a powerful light on what life and experience can be like when lacking such qualities.

Husserl sees himself as a pupil of Socrates and, like him, as a “beginner” in philosophy. He never tires of repeating it: that recurrent sophistic attitude which “deprives life of any rational sense” and lived experience of any relation to truth and value, and first motivate ed Socratic questioning, rekindles even now a need for philosophy and “the examined Edmund Husserl life” (Husserl 1956: 11). Husserl, the “functionary of humanity,” had a caring, almost medical attitude toward pathogenic obstacles to the growth of individuation, inner free dom, moral responsibility, and cognitive plasticity of which personal flourishing ideally consists (Husserl 1976: 15).

There are many themes in Husserl’s thought that are inspiring sources for phenomena logical psychopathology. We shall reconstruct Husserlian phenomenology out of six of them, relating them to some major issues and authors in the literature on psychopatholo gy.

From Stump’s Lab and Cantor’s Paradise to # the Life-World Husserl’s intellectual career starts at the University of Hale, where the young Bathe magician, psychologist, and philosopher defended his postdoctoral Dissertation On the Concept (p. 12) of Numbers on June 28, 1887, with two great innovators, respectively, of mathematics and experimental psychology, Reorg Cantor and Carl Stump, on his examine ing board (Schumann 1977: 17). Husserl had already been an assistant to Carl Meier stress, another major figure in that “foundational crisis” which originated set theory, for mal mathematics, and modern symbolic logic. In Vienna, Franz Brentano had introduced him to the new discipline of empirical psychology. There he would work out the key con Dept of intentionality he famously took over from Brentano, the basic conceptual tool for a phenomenological theory of consciousness. But it is in Stump’s lab where they collabo rated on what they called experimental phenomenology, a pioneering set of research projects on perception that Husserl continued while preparing his Philoso phy of Arithmetic and later his Logical Investigations. Husserl’s thought was born at the crossroads of two scientific revolutions: one in the world of ideal objects and a prior thought and the other in the world of experience and a posterior knowledge. The generating core of phenomenology is made up of these two ingredients that in Husserl’s thought give rise to a radically new conception of both worlds—the ideal and the empirical, abstractness and concreteness—and of their intimate link (Husserl 1977a: 7–18). Focusing on this point should allow us to grasp the unity and coherence of Husserl’s thought throughout his career, for it is the very same point he made in the first and last pages of his corpus: Philosophy of Arithmetic and the Crisis. As we shall see, this point is also the very foundation of what is specific to phenomenological psychopathology in many of its varieties and to its corresponding Blini cal attitude toward the patient.

Back to the Things Themselves Let’s turn our attention to the very motto of phenomenologists: “Back to the things them selves.” This dictum expresses a basic principle of phenomenology, that is, the principle of priority of the given over the construed. Of course, in itself there is nothing uniquely phe nomenological about this principle. It is a typical feature of empiricism. What phenom Edmund Husserl nology rejects about empiricism is the idea of sensory atomism, that is, a lack of structure in the given (the phenomenal world) as such. That is, contrary to Kant’s formless “Bani fold of the intuition,” any phenomenal object has form or structure as given to the senses.

This discovery—let’s call it the gestalt principle—may well be the common (“Stumpfian”) heritage of phenomenology and gestalt theory. Husserl advances beyond this principle through two important steps. The first step is a generalization from ordinary perceptual objects to all sorts of intuitively given ones, including ideal objects. The idea of a “figural moment” (a line of trees, a school of fish, a swarm of birds, etc.) is generalized into that of a structure with any content whatsoever. We do have structural intuitions: a letter-type, a geometric figure, the logical form of a proposition, such as p & ⅂p. To be “self-given,” in any modality of intuitive presence—be it sensory perception, emotional feeling, empathy, logical or mathematical intuition—is to be given as a structured, internally differentiated, organized whole, or as a part of it.

The second step is Husserl’s rigorous foundation for an anti-reductive ontology of every day life, rejecting physicalism as well as psychological atomism. He achieved this by gen realizing the idea of gestalt into the idea of a structure with any content whatsoever, “keeping together” or “containing” partial contents. Is there a way of being “together” which (p. 13) is tighter than that of an arbitrary collection, or a mereological sum? Take a melody, and consider what you can’t do if you don’t want to disrupt it. You cannot change a note arbitrarily, without changing other notes accordingly. What you can change and how depends on the “contents” of the parts, not just as parts, but based on their function in the whole.

Lidos and the Irreducible Richness of the Life-World The key notion of Husserl’s mereology is that of Unity of Containment (or “unitary Noun Cation”— Einheitliche Fundierung— in Husserl’s terminology. This term refers to a bond on possible (co)variations of contents. This definition spells out what we saw in the case of the melody: for each part of the melody there are constraints on free variation relative to the other parts. You cannot vary a note and keep the others unchanged. In Husserl’s terms, the part is not an independent or separable bit, but a dependent or inseparable moment. These constraints are “rooted in the contents” of the melody ( Husserl 1984: 235–236).

We have in this way reached the most central notion of Husserlian phenomenology, and one of the most disputed in the Husserlian corpus: Lidos or essence or material a prior. The Lidos of a thing is not a separate universal: it is nothing but a bond or constraint on possible variations of the thing’s contents, beyond the limits of which that thing ceases to exist or to be a “good” instance of that “kind of thing.”

The results of these advancements can be summarized in three points: the principle of priority of the self-given over the construed, “saving” the phenomena or the richness of the sensible world, with all its secondary and tertiary qualities, all the colors and values of things; the principle of eidetic structure, providing empirical reality with intrinsic Edmund Husserl bounds or limits that any thing of a given sort—a mountain, a piece of music, a human be ing, a human civilization—must comply with or risk ceasing to exist; and, finally, the Solis tic principle forbidding reduction of a given entity to the sum of its component parts (of a melody to its tones, of a person to her or his parts such as body and mind). These prince Ales come together, as three facets of the ontology of the concrete everyday world where the phenomenological philosopher is at home. In the Crisis, this is called the life-world: it is the world of all encounters, stimulating our cognitive curiosity and emotional respond es, and in which our interests, choices, actions, culture, and institutions are rooted.

Husserlian Issues Relevant to Phenomenology # cal Psychopathology One can easily see the relevance of these principles to the clinical approach to the patient —and first of all to the appraisal of the patient’s “melody.” No version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, including the current one, gives us an ac count of how the various symptoms of each disorder hang together in a concrete individ ual case. The differential diagnostics based on the presence of any sum of a minimal num ber of symptoms would not by itself be sufficient to grasp the “invariant style” or the “living plot” of the symptoms’ bearer. The prob lem with this operational (p. 14) approach is that the very “contents” of the individual case are missed. The classics of phenomenological psychopathology dissociative identity disorder in fact produce a sort of eidetic, not so much of the varieties of mental disease, as of the varieties of per sons with mental suffering. Their study cases are sometimes paradigms of the method of eidetic variation on—and beyond—the bounds of normality, which end up with “Festal ten,” ideal-typical cases, which, at the same time, bear the mark of a personal individual ty as required by the “inseparability of matter of fact and essence”( Husserl 1977a: 12, English translation at 8).

Naturalistic and Personalistic Attitudes—and the Epoché A medical doctor in the exercise of her profession has to keep switching from a “personal istic” to a “naturalistic” attitude toward her patient. This crucial conceptual distinction is introduced by Husserl as part of the description of the “world of the natural attitude,” that is, the pre-theoretical everyday stance we find ourselves in when pursuing our habit ual activities in the surrounding world, dealing with things, encountering people, and tak ing their existence for granted in our commitments and daily work routines (Husserl 1977a: 50–62). The “personalistic” attitude ( Einstellung ) is the one we naturally, pre-tho retically adopt when encountering persons: it is the right position ( Stellung ) correspond ing to the phenomenon of personhood, that is, the “mode of presence” of another person. This is altogether different from the mode of presence of a thing. A person is perceived as such, as a center of spontaneous action and affection, as a being endowed with sensibility and power, whose gaze can make me feel ashamed or move me to tears. “Empathy” is the technical phenomenological term to denote those modes of consciousness, or experience, Edmund Husserl in which another subject is (immediately, preconceptually) given as a person. The person alistic attitude qualifies the “subjective pole” of any mode of consciousness whose “object Dive pole” is another person: its “position” is right if it is adequate to the Seinsinn or “noe ma,” the apparent “meaning” of the presented being, often an adult, morally autonomous and self-responsible human being. The personalistic attitude is the “natural” intersubjec Dive attitude, as opposed to the “naturalistic” attitude, or the scientific and technical one the medical doctor has to adopt when operating on my stomach. She will have to switch back to the personalistic one when consulting my will or informing me about her diagno sis.

Note that the preceding description has been made possible by focusing on our pre-tho retinal attitude, and its “naive,” uncritical confidence in the solid ground of reality we are immersed in and surrounded by. Doing this means “bracketing” the overall commitment to reality built into the natural attitude or “suspending” this natural attitude to allow philosophical reflection on it: an exercise of “epoché,” the gateway to phenomenology.

The peculiarity of phenomenological psychiatry, as opposed to the rest of the medical pro Cession, is that the personalistic attitude seems to become the appropriate one even at the specifically clinical level, beyond the natural pre-theoretical phases of the clinical Bela son. The conceptualization of this difference is the legacy of Karl Jasper. Both in clinical theory and therapeutic practice he conceives of psychopathology as a bold extension of folk psychology, which is what we engage in when trying to “understand” other people’s motivations on the basis of the direct, “empathic” understanding we gather of their emo sons and intentions through interpersonal communication. Yet this extension famously finds its limit at the very heart of the world of mental disorders with the apparent disrupt son of the “normal” (p. 15) motivational connections in typical cases of schizophrenia. Here empathic understanding ( Verstehen ) must be replaced by causal explanation ( Erk lären ), and the psychiatrist’s attitude becomes a “naturalistic” one.

Reason and Normality The exclusion of the personalistic attitude in the clinical relationship exactly where the very “drama of insanity” bursts out distinguishes the weak from the strict sense of phe nomenological psychopathology. Overcoming Jasper’s limit, making sense even of delusions, is the first achievement of a phenomenologically inspired psych try.

While any state of consciousness is a lived experience ( Erlebnis ), not all lived experience is an encounter with reality ( Erfahrung ), or, in Husserl’s terminology, an “originarily pre Denting” consciousness, presenting reality “in flesh and bones” ( Husserl 1977a: 11; Spiegelberg 1972: lxiv). Sensory perception is the paradigm of Erfahrung, not its only form. Emotional feeling presents the value-qualities of reality; empathy presents the em bodied subjective aspects of it. The mark of an encounter with reality is fallibility—and corrigibility.

Edmund Husserl The major innovation of Husserl’s concept of intentionality with respect to Brentano’s lies in the ability to distinguish among the different intentional structures of different modes of consciousness, particularly of the modes which are susceptible to encounters with real ity. This is no longer just the “aboutness” or direction toward an object characteristic of most mental states. No classical phenomenologist has been as aware as Husserl of the importance of both poles of the intentional relation. Perception, as we have seen, can get reality wrong and correct itself. It would not be able to do this if it were just a function of the causal impact of reality on the sensory organs. Perception has a claim of validity built into it, expressed by its “positional” subjective pole. It tacitly claims that the perceived thing is there and transcends the actually present side of it, like a cube seen by its front face. This further virtually infinite source of information, which is given as the horizon of any perceptual certainty, is exactly what we call “reality.” We could not “learn from exp rience” if we could not further explore that horizon, turning false positions of certainty in to perplexity, doubt, conjecture. Because of its veridicality claim, perception is “under the jurisdiction of reason” ( Husserl 1977a: 259). But any experience reveals itself to be under this “jurisdiction,” for any experience has a positionality of its own. An emotion can be in appropriate; a desire, misguided; a decision, bad; a judgment, false. Any intentional state is subject to questioning with regard to its “positional” validity claim. This, according to Husserl, is Socrates’s wonderful discovery about consciousness, and it leads to the birth of philosophy.

This is also the reason why phenomenology, as a study of consciousness, cannot be re Educed to descriptive psychology, as Brentano thought. For consciousness, even at its most basic level of embodiment in the sensible and social world, is “under the jurisdiction of reason” ( Husserl 1977a: 259). Note that the limited concept of intentionality inherited from Brentano is also the current one in most contemporary analytic philosophy of mind. In fact, intentionality is usually explained as “directedness” or “aboutness,” or the proper ty that a mental state usually has to be “about” an object ( Searle 1983: 1; Chalmers 1996: 19; Crane 2001: 13). In contrast, Husserl’s theory of intentionality as involving positional ity as well at its subjective pole, and hence potentially a quest for adequacy or reason, provides the key concept for a fine-grained analysis of the ways this quest is escaped through illusion, (p. 16) self-deception, biased and uncritical thinking, or irrationality. “Man is a normative animal,” as Husserl has it ( Husserl 1988: 59), and a pretty reluctant one.

This is also the reason why phenomenology, as a study of consciousness, cannot be re Educed to descriptive psychology, as Brentano thought. For consciousness, even at its most basic level of embodiment in the sensible and social world, is “under the jurisdiction of reason” ( Husserl 1977a: 259). Note that the limited concept of intentionality inherited from Brentano is also the current one in most contemporary analytic philosophy of mind. In fact, intentionality is usually explained as “directedness” or “aboutness,” or the proper ty that a mental state usually has to be “about” an object ( Searle 1983: 1; Chalmers 1996: 19; Crane 2001: 13). In contrast, Husserl’s theory of intentionality as involving positional ity as well at its subjective pole, and hence potentially a quest for adequacy or reason, provides the key concept for a fine-grained analysis of the ways this quest is escaped through illusion, (p. 16) self-deception, biased and uncritical thinking, or irrationality. “Man is a normative animal,” as Husserl has it ( Husserl 1988: 59), and a pretty reluctant one.

How does this all concern psychopathology? It does so by helping it to disambiguate its basic category, that of “normality/abnormality.” “Normality” has a statistical/factual sense and a normative one. The most significant when thinking of mental disorders is the latter. Yet fear of undue interference of morality in the realm of medicine keeps mainstream psy chiatry clinging to the former. This does not do justice to what we consider real impair Bent of free will and agency, often significant enough to excuse psychotic patients from penal and moral responsibility—not to mention failures to adequately address the differ Once between “madness” and dissent from social conventions, ignorance of which can lead to the worst abuses of medical power.

Edmund Husserl Variations of Global Motivational Structures The impact of Husserl’s fine-grained analysis of embodied normality on psychopathology goes even deeper. It gives rise to two main conceptual advances: the typology of (deviant) norms and forms of being-in-the-world, each corresponding to a deep and characteristic alteration of the whole personal ty more than to nosographic categories; and the identification of the basic and global nature of pathogenic deviation from normality, the “loss of natural evi Fence”. The link between the two can be found in a quote Bin swinger famously comments upon, from Husserl’s Formal and Transcendental Logic: “The real world is only under a presumption, constantly renewed, that experience ought to always unfold in the same constitutive style” ( Binswanger 1960: 24). Now, as Husserl constantly shows through his “constitutive” analyses, the ordinary “constitutive style” of reality depends on at least four covariant variables: the structures of lived space, those of lived time, those of intersubjectivity, and those of basic self-constitution. A major alter Cation of the norm can occur along any of these axes, issuing in a different “constitutive style” of lived experience—and yielding the phenomenology of psychiatric alienation as described by phenomenological psychopathologists.

The Loss of Natural Evidence “Negative” symptoms (such as Effective flattening, impoverishment of speech and lan gauge, anhedonia, attentional impairment) can underlie major positive symptoms of schizo ophrenia such as hallucinations and delusions, but can also subsist without them, as in chronic difficulty in a person’s relationship toward reality and other people. Husserl’s constitutive analysis offers a powerful frame for understanding this difficulty. It is as if the “presumption” concerning the customary style of evidence had gone missing—as if the familiarity of the common world had been disrupted. It is as if that epoché with which a phenomenologist “brackets” all tacit assumptions of common sense had fallen upon a person like a spell, dissolving the bedrock of normal interaction and linguistic commune cation, the “background” of tacit rules or the “underground” of such rules that provide the “continuous consistency [ Kontinuerliche Einstim migkeit ]” of ordinary (p. 17) experience (Husserl 1977b: 206). Wolfgang Blankenburg fa mousy called this condition “a loss of natural evidence”. As a copse quince, nothing in the life-world can be taken for granted, no fluid habit of action can be acquired—“common sense” falls apart.

Levels of Self-Constitution: The Lived Body Self-constitution is the basic, pre-reflective experience we have of ourselves. Selfhood is normally “given” with the ordinary experience of other things and persons as the living, subjective pole of this experience, “taking positions,” being passively motivated, “struck” by all salient qualities of the surrounding world. Mainstream cognitive research considers typical schizophrenic delusions of thought insertion, “voices,” etc., to be effects of a dys function in the self-monitoring mechanism of the brain. Yet far from being a Edmund Husserl second-order supplement to basic experience, pre-reflective self-awareness is constitutive of embodied perception, as Husserl has shown by describing the spatial horizon of actionand-perception, where objects occupy positions in a self-centered system of coordinates structured by gravity and kinaesthesia (Husserl 1952: 144–161). The key concept of this domain of analysis is the Lab/Köper distinction, that is, the distinction between the or ganism that obviously supports all mental life but is only given as an object, in a naturals tic attitude, from a third-person perspective; and our lived body, or the body experienced from a first-person perspective, as the origin of this perspective, “flagged up” by pain and pleasure, lived through one’s sense of agency and power. After Husserl, dif ferment ingredients of basic self-awareness—sense of agency, sense of ownership, Genes thesis, tactile sensibility, and emotional sensibility have been identified and made available to the psychopathology of selfhood. For example, Josef Paras, Dan Zahavi, and colleagues have designed EASE, a psychometric tool which has already been translated into nine languages and is used to measure Visor Hers of self-experience in patients at risk of developing schizophrenia.

Common Sense and Social Interaction and Cognition It is a phenomenological fact, demonstrated by Husserl’s research and by that of his col laboratory on social interaction and cognition, that both the constitution of a common, intersubjective world and the constitution of oneself depend on primary intersubjectivity, the foundation of which is the mother–child pair. Italian phe nomenological psychopathology in particular has underlined the importance of this fact, which grounds the very possibility of interpersonal therapeutics, where the psychiatrist can offer his “patient consciousness” as a mirror and resource for couple son of a partially failed or distorted self-constitution. The discovery of mirror neurons as the neurobiological foundations of primary intersubjectivity have revived the rich phenomenology of pre-reflective at tenement, encounter, primary socialization, and interaction which animated early phe nomenology by updating it through criticism of alternative models of social cognition such as theory of (p. 18) mind and simulation theory. This revival of empa thy research has had a significant impact on contemporary psychopathological research on autism. PAGE_BREAK Husserl E. (1977a). Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophic. Estes Bus: Allgemeine Einführung in die Heine Phänomenologie 1. Alb band: Text der 1.-3. Auflage—Nachdruck HUA 3-1. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff. (English translation. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book. General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology, trans. Fred Ker ten).

Husserl E. (1977b). Formal und Transzendentale Logic. Band I: Versus Diner Kritik der Logischen Vernunft. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

(p. 19) Husserl E.. Logische Untersuchungen. Zweiter Neil. Untersuchungen zur Phänomenologie und Theorize der Erkenntnis. In zwei Bäden. HUA 19. The Hague, Netherlands: Martins Nijhoff.

Husserl E. (1988b). “Formal Type von Kultur in Menschheitsentwicklung.” In E. Husserl, Au'sätze und Vorträge. 1922–1937, pp. 59–94. The Hague: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Gallagher S.. How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Gallese fifth.. “Intentional Attunement: A Neurophysiological Perspective on Social Cognition and its Disruption in Autism.” Brain Research 1079: 5–24.

Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie, 7. underänderte Auflage. Heidelberg: Stringer Verlag.

Merleau-Monty M.. La structure du comportment. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Minkowski E.. Le temps vécu: éDudes phénoménologiques et psychopathologiques. Paris: Collection de l’évolution psychiatrique.

Minkowski E.. Traité de psychopathologie. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Paras J., Møleer P., Kirchner T, Thalbitzer J., Jansson L., Hardest P., and Zahavi D.. “EASE. Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience.” Psychopathology 38: 236–258.

Radcliffe M.. Feelings of Being: Phenomenology, Psychiatry and the Sense of Real ty. Oxford: Oxford University Press Rizzolatti G. and Sinigaglia C.. So Duel che fai. Milan: Corina.

Schemer M.. Der Formalism's in der Ethic und die material Wertethik. Bern: France Verlag.

Edmund Husserl Schneider K.. Klinische Psychopathologie. Stuttgart: Theme. Schumann K.. Husserl-Chronic—Denkund Lebensweg Edmund Husserl. Den Hag: Martinis Nijhoff. Searle J. R., Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Spiegelberg H.. Phenomenology in Psychology and Psychiatry: A Historical Intro Auction. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Stanghellini G.. Psicopatologia del sens commune. Milan: Raffaello Corina. Stein E.. Zum Problem der Einfühlung. Gesamtausgabe, Bd. 5. Freiburg: Herder. Straps E. W.. Phenomenological Psychology. London: Tavistock Publications. Straps E. W.. Psychiatry and Philosophy. Berlin: Stringer Verlag. von Gebsattel fifth. E.. Prolegomena Diner medizinischen Anthropologie. Ausgewähate Au'sätze. Berlin: Stringer Verlag. Wittgenstein L.. Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell. Zahavi D.. “Empathy and Direct Social Perception: A Phenomenological Proposal.” Review of Philosophy and Psychology 2: 541–558. Zahavi D. (ed.). Exploring the Self: Philosophical and Psychopathological Perspex Dives on Self-Experience. Amsterdam: John Benjamin.

Roberta de Monticello Facoltà di Filosofia, Universityà Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Italic Edmund Husserl Schneider K.. Klinische Psychopathologie. Stuttgart: Theme. Schumann K.. Husserl-Chronic—Denkund Lebensweg Edmund Husserl. Den Hag: Martinis Nijhoff. Searle J. R., Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Spiegelberg H.. Phenomenology in Psychology and Psychiatry: A Historical Intro Auction. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Stanghellini G.. Psicopatologia del sens commune. Milan: Raffaello Corina. Stein E.. Zum Problem der Einfühlung. Gesamtausgabe, Bd. 5. Freiburg: Herder. Straps E. W.. Phenomenological Psychology. London: Tavistock Publications. Straps E. W.. Psychiatry and Philosophy. Berlin: Stringer Verlag. von Gebsattel fifth. E.. Prolegomena Diner medizinischen Anthropologie. Ausgewähate Au'sätze. Berlin: Stringer Verlag. Wittgenstein L.. Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell. Zahavi D.. “Empathy and Direct Social Perception: A Phenomenological Proposal.” Review of Philosophy and Psychology 2: 541–558. Zahavi D. (ed.). Exploring the Self: Philosophical and Psychopathological Perspex Dives on Self-Experience. Amsterdam: John Benjamin.

Roberta de Monticello Facoltà di Filosofia, Universityà Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Italic The Role of Psychology According to Edith Stein The Role of Psychology According to Edith Stein Angela Ales Cello The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords To understand the role of psychology as science according Edith Stein, we have to clarify the main features of her philosophical anthropology. Through the phenomenological analysis of the lived experiences she discovers the complex structure of the human being: the bodily, the psychic, and the spiritual life. The psychic level is ruled by causality, but it is different from the causality that we find in the nature, because it is not deterministic. In the psyche there is also an implicit motivation, but the explicit one is present in the spiritual life. For this reason, according to her, psychology, even if it is the science of the psyche, cannot avoid dealing with the spiritual aspect of the human being. Stein’s psi son is very important in order to grasp the limits of a psychology that follows the model of natural sciences.

Keywords: Edith Stein, Husserl, psychology, phenomenological method, psyche, body, natural sciences # Introduction EDITH Stein was one of Husserl’s most talented students in Göttingen. In her dissertation on empathy from 1916, On the Problem of Empathy, composed under Husserl’s guidance in Freiburg im Breisgau, she applied his method to inter subjective relations. During that time she also helped him with the transcriptions of his manuscripts, particularly the second volume of Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. Regarding the question of the phe nomenological method, in her 1922 long essay entitled “Philosophy of Psychology and the Humanities”, which I shall deal with later, she resumed some of the themes that Husserl had developed in his Ideas by placing the accent on consciousness as a flow of lived experiences ( Erlebnisstrom ), obtained after a change in the natural attitude (epoché ). Through the Husserlian method it was possible to better describe how a human being is constituted starting from inside. She distanced herself from Heidegger, whom The Role of Psychology According to Edith Stein she would later criticize, kindly but robustly, and was closer to two of Husserl’s other stu dents: Hedwig Conrad-Marius and Gerda Walter.

Then her philosophy assumed a new intellectual course linked to her conversion from Ju deism to Catholicism. The critical confrontation with the ideas of Husserl and Thomas Aquinas marked the beginning of a vast project of inquiry that involved Greek thought passing through medieval and modern philosophy to reach contemporary thought. Her in Mention was not to return to the past, but to seek the truth, and both phenomenology and the medieval philosophers—not only Aquinas, but also Augustine and Duns Scouts—were helpful in this attempt. She felt the need to get to grips with the traditional metaphysical questions, that is, the meaning of the human being, of the world, and of God. Her last and most important book was Finite and Eternal Being, written while she was al ready a nun in the Camel of Köln. In any case as regards the analysis of the human be ing, both in his/her individuality and inside the communities, she remained faithful to the phenomenological approach. The topic, in which she showed the orig nality of (p. 21) her approach, is represented, in fact, by the analysis of the human beings in their psychic and spiritual manifestations, in their gender differences, and in their community life. Because of the Nazis’ persecu son of Jews, she left Germany and entered into the Camel in Est Holland; while staying there she wrote The Science of the Cross on the mystical writings of St. John of the Cross. However, the Nazis soon reached Holland too, and she was captured and sent to Auschwitz, where she died in 1942.

She was interested not only in philosophy but also in the development of the sciences, particularly the human sciences, and she dedicated a great deal of attention to the Bela tionship between body and soul, challenging the conclusions of experimental psychology, which was still in its formative stages at the beginning of the twentieth century.

In 1922, Stein published a long essay, “ Beiträge zur philosophischen Begründung der Psy chologie und der Geisteswissenschaften ” (Stein 1970; English translation: “Philosophy of Psychology and the Humanities” ) in the fifth volume of the Jahrbuch für Philosophic und phänomenologische Forschung, edited by Husserl. This essay must be read against the background of the lively discussions at the time about the signify icance of psychology as a science; discussions in which Husserl, under the influence of his teachers, Franz Brentano and Wilhelm Maximilian Wundt, had participated as a young scholar.

In this work, she examines in a phenomenological manner the structures that experiment tal psychology employs and the claim that it is a scientific discipline. She argues that psy chology fails to grasp the essential significance of psychic phenomena. The essay repre Dented the realization of Husserl’s project and, in Edith Stein’s characteristic style, dealt with the matter with great clarity and analytical acuity.

The Role of Psychology According to Edith Stein # Psyche and Causality Edith Stein begins with a question that recurs throughout the history of philosophy, but which became particularly important in the age of positivism: Is the human being subject to the bonds of causality that characterize the physical nature of which it is an integrated part?

Stein begins by examining a common and daily experience: I feel cold, but I can deceive myself as to the content of this sensation that I describe as “cold,” and I can be deceived by my consciousness of this lived experience. Certainly, I feel when I am aware of the sen Cation; I feel cold and nothing else when I have this sensation, but it is possible that I feel cold without really being cold, and I may subsequently realize this. In the case of feelings regarding myself ( Gefühle ) (feeling cold, for example) an external condition (cold) and an internal property or capacity both present themselves. In the case of the Gefühle, we can speak of a life force ( Lebenskraft ) that nevertheless must not be confused with the pure I 1 as the flow of lived experiences ( Erlebnisse ) (Stein 1970: 19–20).

This is an important distinction between psychology and phenomenology; it is also a clari fixation of the relationship between psyche and consciousness. Here, we find the earlier distinction made by Husserl, who stressed that the causes that determine psychic life must not (p. 22) be sought in life feelings ( Lebensgefühle ), but in the “modes” of a life force ( Lebenskraft ) that is announced in them (Stein 1970: 20).

Changes in life conditions reflect a greater or lesser life force; this means that causality has nothing to do with the sphere of lived experiences. No pure lived experience can form part of a causal event; rather, as has already been said, lived experiences concern the life force insofar as both life feelings and lived experiences are only manifestations of the real causality of the psyche.

It is important to note, however, that psychic causality is different from physical causal ty; the psyche of an individual is a world of its own just like material nature is its own world. Even force manifests itself differently in the two cases. Whereas in physical na Cure, force can be observed as the result of a material event, in the psychic sphere it can be grasped only through its lived modes. A distinction has to be made between the sphere of lived experiences ( Erlebnisse ) and that of the life sphere ( Lebenssphäre ), which consti Lutes a substratum of the flow of lived experiences (Stein 1970: 22).

The relationship between the two spheres can be better understood if one notes that con sciousness and the flux of its lived experiences can be imagined as devoid of life feelings. In this case we find ourselves faced with a flow of data of a different kind, that is, quality and intensity without “coloring” and tension, namely, the tension peculiar to the life sphere. One has to note the presence of life feelings, of a “field” that has its characters tics, but which “colors” all the data of the flow; this flow cannot be brought to a halt (Stein 1970: 30).

The Role of Psychology According to Edith Stein According to Stein, there does not exist any kind of determinism in psychic life, even though we can note some connections and, therefore, some “causal” relationships. In deed, these enable us to note the presence in the psychic life of a “causality” that is com pletely different from the exact causality characteristic of scientific thought. Likewise, a quantitative determination of psychic states is out of the question, because we are here concerned with a flow of qualitative states that can be recognized only in their essential structure.

There is also present in the I another series of phenomena that are characterized by their representing an intentional moving toward something; these are “acts” ( Ate ) or intel tonal lived experiences ( intentional Erlebnisse ) with which spiritual life commences. Even in psychic life it is possible to trace a first form of intentionality, but this is no more than outlined. If we examine some acts that we perform in everyday life, we shall realize the meaning of intentionality. With the meticulousness and clarity that distinguish her style, Stein gives us very precise indications to pinpoint them. Our eyes may be turned in ward to discover the acts present there and this, in turn, is important, because it enables us to understand others’ acts, as in the case of empathy, and also ourselves. Here we have the act of reflection. Assuming a reflective or meditative attitude, we can begin to describe these acts. If we are concerned with an external object that presents it self as “transcendent,” we have an act that places us in a relationship with what is out side ourselves. One could describe it, even though Stein does not use this term, as an act of “perception.” In the case of external objects, moreover, we can relate their various as Sects in such a manner that they are no longer merely one beside the other; rather, they form part of a connection, before and after, for example, as is the case for “appercep son.” We can also put them all together, and here we have a “synthesis.” We can even concern ourselves with the particular act that is the “setting in motion of what comes af ter through what there is before” ( in-Bewegung-gesetzt-warden der späteen Burch die früheren ), which is “motivation” ( Motivation ) (Stein 1970: 34–35).

(p. 23) Motivation Motivation presents itself as the type of link that exists between acts. We are here neither concerned with a co-penetration of simultaneous or successive phases nor with the Basso ciative connection; rather, we are dealing with an issuing of the one lived experience from the other, a manner in which the one completes itself or is so completed by virtue of the other. Given this relationship, the structure of lived experiences where a relationship of motivation is established becomes configured as acts that have their origin in the pure I. The I performs one act because it has already performed the other. This can happen ei her consciously or unconsciously; an explicit motivation exists in the case in which one proceeds from the premises to the consequences, while an implicit motivation exists when, like in a mathematical proof, we make use of a theorem without demonstrating it ex nova. It is clear that every explicit motivation becomes sedimented as implicit and that every implicit motivation is capable of being made explicit (Stein 1970: 35–36).

The Role of Psychology According to Edith Stein Implicit motivations occur in the ambit of perception. When we examine the knowledge of a thing that can be sensed, it becomes clear that having sensations is a first form of mos Cation. But we have a motivation relationship in the proper sense of the term when, face to face with some physical thing of which we can see only a part, we deem the existence of the other parts to be equally true, and this comprehension can eventually motivate a free movement that pushes us to a verification through actual perception. In the same way, something that is perceptively given may be the motive for believing in the existence of a thing and the belief in its existence may be what motivates our judgment regarding its existence. In the ethical sphere, similarly, grasping a value may be the motive for the will and for acting (Stein 1970: 36).

The relationship between act and motivation can be understood as follows: when con sciousness turns to an object, it does not intend a void tenth, but something that has a con tent of determinate sense, as a bearer of a unitary consistency of being that is enclosed within it. Little by little, the content gives itself, filling out the sense of the object. This is true not only of physical things, but also of our knowledge of propositions and the state of things. In the latter case, a state of things may form part of different logical connections, for that is what rational motivation consists of. The ambit of possibilities, however, is lim ted and when the knowing subject oversteps this ambit, we come face to face with the ir rational (Stein 1970: 37–38).

The passage from one act to another takes place thanks to motivation, and it is for this same reason that the flow of lived experiences becomes configured as the sum total of acts and motivations that underlie lived experiences. Motivation, therefore, serves to jus tidy a series of acts that in the cognitive ambit regard the “turning to,” the taking of psi son, and consequently accepting and negating as “free” acts.

In spite of the distinction between causality and motivation, there is a connection be tween the two. Offering an example that is particularly dear to her, Stein shows how causal factors and motivations can both come into play. The joy that somebody gives me motivates me to form the intention to return the joy, but a feeling that suddenly gets the better of me prevents me from carrying out something that would be motivated in a rea sonable manner (Stein 1970: 69).

(p. 24) The life of the psyche, therefore, seems to be the combined action of several forces: the sensible force, which presents itself in relation to the apprehension of sense data and in our sense impulses, and the spiritual force, which is a force that is wholly new and different from the sense force, manifesting itself in spiritual activities and capacities. Spiritual activity can only be realized, however, within the collaboration of the sense force. The latter has its roots in nature and this justifies its psychophysical connection, that is, the link between psyche, body, and material nature. Through the spiritual force, the psyche opens to the objective world and can acquire new impulses. The nourishment of the spiritual force of the individual psyche may derive from an “objective” spiritual world, a world of values, or from the spiritual force of other subjects and from the divine spirit. In any case, it is necessary to locate a personal core ( Kern) subtracted from all The Role of Psychology According to Edith Stein physical and psychic conditioning that is constituted by the capacity of willing, the sphere of free acts (Stein 1970: 106).

By way of conclusion, we can ask which kind of science is psychology, according to Stein. Arguing against, above all, the positivist claim, she underscores the impossibility of founding psychology as an exact science in conformity with a scientific model bound up with physics. This scientific model is present in contemporary psychology, particularly in cognitivism. In this sense psychology is linked with anatomy, neurophysiology, and the neuroscience, which use technical instruments to explore the human body and brain. That shows the actuality of Edith Stein’s contribution in favor of a humanistic approach to psychology and to psychopathology. PAGE_BREAK Martin Heidegger is one of the most influential philosophers of the twenty eth century. His influence, however, extends beyond philosophy. His account of Casein, or human existence, permeates the human and social sciences, including nursing, psychic try, psychology, sociology, anthropology, and artificial intelligence. This chapter outlines Heidegger’s influence on psychiatry and psychology, focusing especially on his relation ships with the Swiss psychiatrists Ludwig Binswanger and Medard Boss. The first section outlines Heidegger’s early life and work, up to and including the publication of Being and Time, in which he develops his famous concept of being-in-the-world. The second section focuses on Heidegger’s initial influence on psychiatry via Binswanger’s founding of Da seinsanalysis, a Heideggerian approach to psychopathology and psychotherapy. The third section turns to Heidegger’s relationship with Boss, including Heidegger’s rejection of Binswanger’s Daseinsanalysis and his lectures at Boss’s home in Zollikon, Switzerland.

Keywords: Heidegger, Binswanger, Boss, Casein, Daseinsanalysis, psychology, psychiatry, Zollikon # Introduction MARTIN Heidegger is one of the most influential philosophers of the twenty eth century. His magnum opus, Being and Time, was a catalyst for French existentialism, philosophical hermeneutics, and even deconstruction and poststructuralism. Many of the central works of twentieth-century continental philosophy—including Jean-Paul Sartre’s Being and Nothingness, Maurice Merleau-Monty’s Phenomenology of Perception, Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex, and Hans-Reorg Gadamer’s Truth and Method —are deeply indebted to Heidegger’s philosophical project.

1 Today, Heidegger’s influence extends beyond philosophy. His account of Casein, or hu man existence, permeates the human and social sciences, including nursing, psychiatry, psychology, sociology, anthropology, and artificial intelligence. This broad influence owes much to his rich account of everyday life. Rather than starting from a detached intellect Martin Heidegger al or scientific perspective, Heidegger starts from our “average everydayness.” He ex Flores what it means to be human, which requires that he address everything from the nature of tool use to the challenges of maintaining a social identity to our inevitable con frontation with death.

In this chapter, I outline Heidegger’s influence on psychology and psychiatry, focusing es Specially on his relationships with the Swiss psychiatrists, Ludwig Binswanger and Medard Boss. The first section outlines Heidegger’s early life and work, up to and including the publication of Being and Time, in which he develops his famous concept of being-in-theworld. The second section focuses on Heidegger’s initial influence on psychiatry via Binswanger’s founding of Daseinsanalysis, a Heideggerian approach to psychopathology (p. 26) and psychotherapy. The third section turns to Heidegger’s relationship with Boss, including Heidegger’s rejection of Binswanger’s Daseinsanalysis and his lectures at Boss’s home in Zollikon, Switzerland.

Heidegger’s Early Life and Work: 1889–1927 Martin Heidegger was born in Messkirch, Germany, to Friedrich and Johanna Heidegger, and grew up with his younger brother, Fritz. Friedrich was a master cooper and sexton of the local Catholic church. Martin was therefore brought up in the Catholic tradition and his education, beginning from the age of fourteen, was supported by the church. This sup port was, however, both a blessing and a curse. The church financed educational opportu niches far beyond his family’s means. But it provided these opportunities on the condition that he enter the priesthood. Therefore, when his faith waned, he found himself in a diff cult position: Leave the church and forfeit the opportunity to continue his studies or re main faithful and limit himself to topics that the church would support? (Safranski 1999: chapter 1).

Heidegger struggled with this dilemma for years. In 1909, he entered the novitiate with the intention of becoming a priest but was discharged two weeks later when he com pained of heart trouble (Safranski 1999: 15). In 1911, while studying at the seminary, he was again discharged for heart trouble. At this time, it was determined that he dissociative identity disorder not have the physical constitution to serve the church. After a period at home in Messkirch, Heidegger decided to end his studies of theology. He enrolled at the University of Freiburg in the winter semester 1911–1912 to study mathematics, science, and philoso phy. In the absence of the Catholic church’s financial support, he managed to raise enough funds with a loan, a small grant from the university, and private tutoring. In 1913, he received his doctorate under the supervision of Professor Arthur Schneider, Chair of Catholic Philosophy (Safranski 1999: 43).

Shortly after completing his doctorate, Heidegger began his habilitation. Despite no longer pursuing the priesthood, he was able to secure a grant from a Catholic institution to support three years of study. The following year, 1914, saw the outbreak of the First World War. Owing to his heart condition, Heidegger was able to defer military service and continue working on his habilitation, which he submitted in 1915. Later that year he was Martin Heidegger once again recruited for military service but he was hospitalized a few weeks later, then transferred to a postal supervision center where he censored letters sent to non-allied countries (Safranski 1999: 67).

In 1916, Heidegger met Edmund Husserl, the founder of phenomenology. Husserl, who had just moved from Göttingen to take up a chair at Freiburg, immediately acquired a close circle of acolytes and assistants, including Edith Stein and Heidegger himself. His phenomenology shared much in common with strands of neo-Kantianism active at the time, but it promised a radical new method for understanding human experience. The phenomenologist was said to be a perpetual beginner, bracketing out her previous beliefs and prejudices in order to attend not only to the objects of experience but to the way we experience, or to the experiencing itself. Heidegger, enamored with this new approach, quickly caught Husserl’s attention. Soon, Husserl treated Heidegger not only as an acolyte and assistant, but as a near equal. Even when Heidegger was sent off for active military duty in 1918—joining the (p. 27) frontline meteorological service—the two re Gained in close correspondence (Safranski 1999: chapter 5).

However, as Heidegger’s thinking developed, he merged his own scholastic and Eris totelian training with Husserl’s new method, developing a radically new approach to on tology. To appreciate the radical nature of Heidegger’s ontological project, we first need a general understanding of what ontology is, according to Heidegger. Most of our inquiries, including most of our scientific investigations, philosophical studies, and everyday ques sons, are Antic —they ask about concrete beings or entities. However, some of our filo sophical questions are ontological, rather than Antic—they ask about what it means to be, rather than about concrete beings. We can clarify this distinction with a classic phenom nological example: a coffee mug. If I investigate a coffee mug optically, there are a variety of questions that I might ask: What is it made of? How much liquid does it hold? Who made it? What is its monetary value? These are all questions about the coffee mug itself— questions about its concrete characteristics, history, value, and so on. But I can also study a coffee mug ontologically, in which case I would ask a different set of questions: What does it mean to be a coffee mug? What are the features that something must have in or der to count as a coffee mug? What makes a coffee mug different from a teacup? This dis tinction between the Antic and the ontological is what Heidegger calls the “ontological difference” (see e.g. Heidegger 1962: 83; 1988: 227–229; 2001: 116). This difference is key to his philosophical program and its proper interpretation was a major point of con Mention in psychological and psychiatric applications of his work.

How, then, dissociative identity disorder Heidegger transform the field of ontology? One of Heidegger’s key in sights is that ontology isn’t just a philosophical program. Ontology permeates everyday life. Every time I engage with an Antic being—such as a coffee mug, a writing desk, or my colleague—I operate with a tacit sense of what it means to be this being. This does’t mean that I can list off necessary and sufficient criteria. Rather, I demonstrate my under standing through my successful engagement. I demonstrate that I understand what it means to be a coffee mug by pulling one out of the cabinet, filling it with coffee, and tak ing a sip as I sit down at my desk. This is what Heidegger calls a “pre-ontological” under Martin Heidegger standing. We may not operate with a well-formulated ontological theory. But we always have a sense of what it means to be.

This insight into the everydayness of ontology grounds Heidegger’s approach in his 1927 2 magnum opus, Being and Time. Here, he argues that ontology must begin with an invest Ligation of the being for whom “Being is an issue,” the being who asks the question of be ing in the first place: the human being (Heidegger 1962: 32). Who we take ourselves to be is always a project, a challenge, a process of becoming. Whether I consider myself to be a friend, a carpenter, an American, or a tourist, there are certain norms and oblige sons that I must fulfill. If I don’t conform to these norms, then I risk losing this possibility for being. In some cases, this loss is trivial. Today I’m a tourist; tomorrow I’m a professor. But, in many cases, the loss of who we take ourselves to be is traumatic. Whether the source of loss is a divorce, a layoff, a fight with a friend, or a political collapse, we lose the possibility for being who we were. In such cases, we realize that our being or identity is fundamentally tied to our social and environmental relations. We become who we are through our interactions with others and (p. 28) the way we take up what our environs Bent offers us. This is why Heidegger says that Casein, or human existence, is not an iso Bated subject or a Cartesian mental substance: Casein is “being-in-the-world.” Human ex istence is always embedded in a world, in a concrete history and community, and can only understand itself as such.

Our being-in-the-world is a complex and multifaceted phenomenon but, as Heidegger ar Cues, its essence is “care” ( Forge )—or what he sometimes refers to as “disclosedness” ( Heidegger 1962: 235–241). Casein is the being that discloses, or opens up, a world of sense and meaning. The coffee mug, for instance, never shows up to me as a brute object. It shows up as the gift that my mother gave me when I moved away for college or as the thing that I need to wash in the kitchen sink so that I can use it again in the morning. Everything that I experience has its sense and meaning within a web of Bela sons, which are ultimately tied to both my cultural context and my particular aims and projects.

Heidegger argues that a world is opened up, or disclosed, through “thrown projection.” We find ourselves already thrown into a world—we are constrained by our culture, lan gauge, class, religious upbringing, and even our previous life choices. But we also project possibilities—we might become a friend, a father, a carpenter, or a professor, or perhaps we’ll continue to be who we already are. The world we find ourselves thrown into both opens and constrains our potentialities-for-being, the range of possibilities that we can project. According to Heidegger, this tension of thrownness and projection discloses a meaningful world.

The particular meaning that something has for me emerges from the tension between my concrete thrownness and the particular possibilities that I project for myself. In a class room, for example, the whiteboard has a substantially different meaning for the students, the professor, and the custodian. How we engage with the whiteboard depends on who we take ourselves to be. For the students it is the thing to look at when taking notes. For Martin Heidegger the professor it is a way to supplement her lecture and illustrate her point. For the Gusto Xian it is an object to clean in preparation for the next day of classes. But, of course, none of us are fixed in these roles or possibilities. The custodian might also be a student in that very classroom. And one of the students—perhaps working toward his PhD—might lec Cure to undergraduates in this classroom before attending his evening graduate seminar. Our identities are neither stable nor uniform. They are always in flux, and each possibility that we take up shifts how we experience and make sense of our world.

But this interchangeability of our possibilities—the simple fact that you might take my place and I might take yours—suggests that they are not really our own. The possibilities we take up are simply given to us by our society and circumstances, and we fulfill them in the way anyone would fulfill them. If I take myself to be a professor, then this means that I teach, mentor students, attend conferences, and publish papers. If I fail to do some or all of these things, then I risk losing my possibility for being a professor—not only in the sense that I might lose my job, but in the sense that no one will recognize me as a probes sor. However, in my day-to-day life, who I take myself to be isn’t something that I reflect upon. I simply fulfill the social norms required for maintaining my possibilities without much thought. Heidegger calls this mode of existence “inauthentic” ( uneigentlich ) and he contrasts it with an “authentic” ( eigentlich ) mode of existence. By employing these terms, Heidegger isn’t necessarily disapproving of our everyday way of life. Rather, his primary aim is to distinguish two different modes of comportment. In an inauthentic comport Bent, we take up our possibilities without explicit reflection. But, in an authentic com portent, we actively (p. 29) choose our possibility for being—even if we simply choose the possibility that we find ourselves already thrown into.

These features of human life make up the core of Heidegger’s ontology of human xis Fence. With the publication of Being and Time, Heidegger established himself as one of the foremost philosophers of the twentieth century. But he probably hand’t expected that it would inspire generations of psychiatrists, providing a foundation for a new approach to psychopathology and psychotherapy.

Heidegger’s First Contact with Psychiatry: # 1928–1947 While Heidegger had a long-standing relationship with the philosopher and psychiatrist, Karl Jasper, it was Ludwig Binswanger who first saw the importance of Heidegger’s work for psychopathology and psychotherapy. Heidegger and Binswanger met in 1929 fol lowing a brief correspondence regarding the celebration of Husserl’s seventieth birthday (Brie 1999: 246). Binswanger—a student of Eugene Bleuler and Carl Jung, and a close friend of Sigmund Freud—was steeped in the psychoanalytic tradition. However, unsatis Died with the philosophical foundations of psychoanalysis, he found in Heidegger’s Being and Time a promising new way of thinking about human existence.

Martin Heidegger Binswanger established a psychiatric approach that he called “Daseinsanalysis” ( Daseins 3 analyze ). On this approach, mental illness is not the product of innate drives or an infer ent tension between id, ego, and superego, but a pathological way of projecting one’s pos sibilities for being. Binswanger found that many of his patients operated with a profound ly limited capacity for selfand world-interpretation, often as the result of traumatic life events. When confronted with especially distressing events, they resorted to a narrow repertoire of interpretive concepts to make sense of themselves and their situations, re salting in a pathological rather than a healthy response. To restore the mental health of his patients, Binswanger helped them broaden their scope of possibilities for being.

Initially, Binswanger clearly distinguished his own aims from those of Heidegger. He char acterized his project as an Antic application of Heidegger’s ontology of Casein. In other words, Heidegger’s ontological account of human existence provided a framework for Binswanger’s Antic studies of particular human pathologies. Over time, however, Bin swinger became more critical of Heidegger’s approach. He argued that Heidegger mis characterized the social dimension of human existence and, therefore, failed to under stand the nature of the face-to-face, I–Thou relationship, which is key to effective psy chotherapy (Binswanger 1993; see also Brie 1999: 249).

(p. 30) Binswanger’s goal was to help his patients achieve an authentic existence. But, on Heidegger’s account, authenticity seems to be something one achieves alone. As Roger Brie says, “Binswanger argues that for Heidegger, authentic existence is a private world, structured by Casein’s concern for its own Being; Casein as care achieves its authenticity in essential isolation from others” ( Brie 1999: 249). In light of Heidegger’s allegedly slip sistic characterization, Binswanger sought to revise both our understanding of what au thenticity is and how it’s achieved. He argues that genuine authenticity emerges from a relationship of dialogue, openness, and mutual engagement—and, moreover, this relation ship must be founded on love, not care. Only through a fundamental attunement of love can the therapist help her patient achieve authenticity (Brie 1999: 248).

Throughout the 1930s and into the 1940s, Binswanger established his new approach to psychotherapy, helping patients overcome their limited possibilities for being and achieve genuine authenticity. During this time, Heidegger underwent a crisis of possibilities in his own life. Because he had joined the Nazi party and served, briefly, as rector of the Univer City of Freiburg in the early 1930s, he faced denazification proceedings after the Second 4 World War. Based largely on Jasper’s expert opinion, he was barred from teaching for four years (Safranski 1999: 339). Heidegger, suddenly stripped of his possibility for being a professor, experienced a mental breakdown. He entered a sanatorium in Badenweiler where he was treated by Victor Baron von Gebsattel, a psychiatrist working in Binswanger’s now influential school of Daseinsanalysis ( Safranski 1999: 351). The follow ing year, 1947, Heidegger read Binswanger’s Grundformen und Erkenntnis menschlichen Daseins (Basic Forms and Knowledge of Human Existence ), which he had received from Binswanger in 1944 (Brie 1999: 250). Upon reading the book, he wrote a supportive and Martin Heidegger encouraging letter to Binswanger, who had been anxiously awaiting Heidegger’s assess Bent.

Heidegger, Boss, and the Zollikon Seminars: # 1947–1976 That same year, Heidegger received a letter from another psychiatrist, Medard Boss, who read Being and Time while serving as a battalion doctor in the Swiss army during the war. The two met shortly after and, over the next three decades, developed a close friendship. But Heidegger’s relationship with Boss cast a dark shadow over Binswanger and his Da seinsanalytic project. Despite his initial enthusiasm for Binswanger’s work, he found in Boss a more formidable representative of his project, eventually rescinding his approval of Binswanger’s work altogether.

The friendship between Heidegger and Boss culminated in a series of seminars held at the University of Zurich Psychiatric Clinic and at Boss’s home in Zollikon, Switzerland, (p. 31) from 1959 to 1969. Heidegger lectured to a group of psychiatrists on ontology, hermeneutics, the nature of embodiment, time and temporality, and—of course—a Heideggerian approach to psychiatric research and practice. In light of the wide-ranging nature of Heidegger’s lectures, I focus here on two of his contributions to psychology and psychiatry: his characterization of the relationship between Daseinsanaly sis and ontology, as clarified through his critique of Binswanger, and his general theory of health and illness, developed in collaboration with Boss.

While Heidegger was enthusiastic about the application of his work in psychology and psychiatry, he dissociative identity disorder have some reservations about the way in which his insights were being applied. In particular, he was concerned that some of these applications involved a misun derstanding of the ontological difference—and he attributed the source of this misunder standing to Binswanger. To illustrate the misunderstanding, Heidegger returned to Binswanger’s critique, in which he argued that Heidegger’s ontology—which established care as the being, or essence, of Casein—left no space for love, which is essential to the therapeutic relationship that leads one out of illness and into authenticity. Heidegger claimed that this critique is not only unwarranted, but is grounded in a fundamental mis understanding of the ontological difference: Binswanger’s misunderstanding consists not so much of the fact that he wants to supplement “care” with love, but that he does not see that care has an existential, that is, ontological sense. Therefore, the analytic of Da-Rein asks for Casein’s basic ontological (existential ) constitution [ Verfassung ] and does not wish to give a mere description of the Antic phenomena of Casein.

(Heidegger 2001: 116)

Martin Heidegger As Heidegger characterizes it, care refers to our basic openness to the world, our basic capacity to find the world meaningfully articulated. It is therefore an ontological strum Cure of Casein, an essential structure that grounds all particular modes of existence. Love, on the other hand, is one of these particular, Antic modes. Love is just one of the many ways in which we might relate to others. Properly understood, Heidegger’s notion of care leaves ample room for love, even if Heidegger never produced a study of love him self.

Despite Binswanger admitting his “productive misunderstanding” in the wake of this cri Pique, Heidegger suggested that Binswanger’s misunderstanding permeated his entire project and, therefore, undermined its legitimacy. He claimed that if Daseinsanalysis is to be successfully employed, it must respect the ontological difference: Daseinsanalysis is merely an Antic application of the ontological analysis of human existence—the insights of 5 Daseinsanalysis cannot, therefore, challenge the insights of Heidegger’s own ontology.

This brings us to the second element of Heidegger’s contribution to psychology and psy chiatry: his theory of health and illness. If pathology does not touch the ontological con stitution of Casein, but only its Antic ways of being, then how should we understand the nature of health and illness? Heidegger argues that illness should be understood as a spe civic (p. 32) kind of negation, which he calls “privation.” To say that the ill person is “de rived of health” implies that health is his proper mode of being—that it, in some sense, belongs to him. As Heidegger says, It is a remarkable fact that your whole medical profession moves within a Mega son in the sense of a privation. You deal with illness. The doctor asks someone who comes to him, “What is wrong with you?” The sick person is not healthy. This being-healthy, this being-well, this finding oneself well is not simply absent but is disturbed. Illness is a phenomenon of privation. Each privation implies the Essen ital belonging to something that is lacking, which is in need of something.

(Heidegger 2001: 46)

According to Heidegger, illness is not simply the privation of some natural biological fun son. It is the privation of possibilities: “Each illness is a loss of freedom, a constriction of the possibility for living” ( Heidegger 2001: 175). In this respect, illness is what Heidegger calls a “deficient mode” of existence. This concept, employed throughout Being and Time, refers to any instance in which one is not open to the full or genuine range of possibili ties. It is a particular, Antic way of being open to the world—a way of being open that, nevertheless, constrains the possibilities that one is open to.

6 This is the foundation upon which Boss constructed his new Daseinsanalytic approach. While he investigated the nuances of various mental illnesses, he construed each illness as a reduction of one’s freedom for possibilities. The therapist’s goal is, therefore, to help her patient maximize his openness toward possibilities for being (Kouba 2015: 104). Boss went so far as to argue—in Existential Foundations of Medicine and Psychology —that this characterization of illness applies not only to mental illness, but to somatic illness as well.

Martin Heidegger Building upon his earlier work on psychosomatic conditions, he characterized all forms of illness as an impairment of our potentialities and freedom for possibilities (Boss 1979: 199–200). Therefore, while Heidegger’s influence on conceptions of health and illness be gan with psychiatric conditions, it eventually extended to the full range of illness.

Conclusion: Heidegger’s Influence Today Today, Heidegger’s work influences not only the philosophical and theoretical literature on health and illness, but medical research and practice itself—especially approaches to psychiatry and nursing. One of the most direct applications is found in the phenomenolo gy of depressive disorders, in which Heidegger’s theory of mood and attunement is used to articulate the Effective disturbance characteristic of depressive episodes. But his account of human xis Fence provides a foundation for understanding a broad range of conditions—from acute, life-treating illness to chronic disabilities. PAGE_BREAK 3 ( ) The German Daseinsanalyse is translated either as “Daseinsanalysis”—maintaining the tradition of not translating “Casein”—or as “existential analysis.” While the latter transl son is less awkward, it risks confusing Binswanger’s approach with other existential ap roaches to psychology and psychiatry, such as Sartre’s existential psychoanalysis.

4 ( ) For a time, there was considerable debate over the nature of Heidegger’s anti-Semitic views and his service to the Nazi party. It was well known that he referred to the “inner truth and greatness” of National Socialism, but later criticized the movement for its at tempt to mobilize the German people into an organized machine, a mere resource for mil itary domination—what Heidegger refers to as “standing reserves”. However, in light of the publication of Heidegger’s Black Notebooks, his anti-Semitic sen timents are undeniable.

5 ( ) I’ve argued elsewhere that Binswanger’s confused understanding of the ontological difference actually provides a more accurate depiction of both human existence and men tal illness. Heidegger denied that mental illness could involve alterations of the ontology cal structure of human existence. However, in some cases, appealing to alterations in the Martin Heidegger ontological structure itself provides a more illuminating, and accurate, account of the condition in question. 6 ( ) To distinguish Binswanger’s and Boss’s approaches, they are sometimes referred to as “psychiatric Daseinsanalysis” and “therapeutic Daseinsanalysis,” respectively.

Anthony Vincent Fernandez Department of Philosophy, University of South Florida ontological structure itself provides a more illuminating, and accurate, account of the condition in question. 6 ( ) To distinguish Binswanger’s and Boss’s approaches, they are sometimes referred to as “psychiatric Daseinsanalysis” and “therapeutic Daseinsanalysis,” respectively.

Anthony Vincent Fernandez Department of Philosophy, University of South Florida Jean-Paul Sartre Jean-Paul Sartre Anthony Hatzimoysis The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Sartre articulated a phenomenological conception the “human being-in-situation,” which forms the ontological background of a therapeutic method that he called “existential psy choanalysis.” The overall principle of existential psychoanalysis is that each agent is a to tality and not a collection, and thus she expresses herself even in the most insignificant or superficial of her behaviors; its goal is to decode and interpret the behavioral patterns, so as to articulate them conceptually; its point of departure is the pre-reflective awareness of lived experience; and its overall goal is to reach not some past psychic complex, but the choice that renders meaningful how one lives—so that the analysand achieves authen ticity, owning up to the projects through which she, as a situated freedom, is making her self into the person she is.

Keywords: Sartre, authenticity, consciousness, emotion, existentialism, psychoanalysis, self-consciousness # Biographical Sketch THE most famous French philosopher of the twentieth century, Jean-Paul Sartre, ob served with an unflinching eye the moving generosity and the common duplicity, the xis tential revelations and the mundane self-deceptions, the intriguing varieties of the ordi nary, and the pathological engagement with the world. Born in Paris in 1905, he entered the École Normal Supérieure in 1924, where he majored in philosophy, while showing systematic interest in psychology: he paid regular visits to patients at St Anne’s Psych attic Hospital, studied Jasper’s General Psychopathology, and volunteered as a subject in psychology experiments whose results formed the backdrop of his 1927 dissertation on “The Image in Psychological Life: Its Role and Nature.”

Initially drawn to philosophy as a resource of ideas for his fiction writing, he dedicated himself to phenomenological research at the prompting of Raymond Aron, who arranged for Sartre’s visit at the Institute rançais in Berlin: from September 1933 to June 1934, Sartre studied Husserl’s major works, expanded the draft of his philosophical novel, Nau Jean-Paul Sartre sea, and composed his seminal essay on “Intentionality”. There follows a decade of phenomenological writings, including The Transcendence of the Ego (2004a), The Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions (2004b), and The Imaginary (2004c), characterized by the originality of Sartre’s critique of idealism, as well as by the novelty of the topics he chose to explore.

With the outbreak of the Second World War, Sartre was posted in the meteorological corps of the French army, and then incarcerated as a prisoner of war from early 1940 un til his escape in the summer of 1941—during which he kept a diary that bears clear wit Bess to the existentialist turn of his phenomenological thinking. 1943 sees the publication of Sartre’s magnum opus, Being and Nothingness, which culminates his involvement with phenomenological ontology and sets the context for the political, aes thetic, and broadly construed psychoanalytic projects he undertook until his death in 1980: he wrote the script for a cinematic biography of Freud, participated in public debates over the status of psychoanalysis, and concluded his ca Beer with a voluminous exploration of the formative years in the life of a concrete individ ual, Gustav Flaubert. However, even the most abstract of his philosophical works involve vivid psychological portraits delivered with magisterial strokes which make a lasting impression in the reader’s mind.

(p. 36) Critique of the Reification of Psychic States For Sartre, consciousness is a movement of fleeing oneself: to be conscious is to ran Ascend oneself toward something. The world encountered in experience is value-laden: “it is things which abruptly unveil themselves to us as hateful, sympathetic, horrible, love able” ( Sartre 1970: 5). Accordingly, our sentiments are attuned to changes because they are a kind of perceptual state of those aspects of reality relevant to our concerns; they are “ways of discovering the world” ( Sartre 1970: 5).

Consciousness is primarily a positional consciousness of a certain object, in the sense that consciousness sets before itself the object as a target of its intentional activity. When one is positionally conscious of an object, one is also non-positionally conscious of being con scions of that object. Pre-reflective consciousness is thus non-positionally aware of itself as being directed toward its objects. On the ground of those distinctions, Sartre raises a forceful critique on the traditional conception of the “Ego,” a cover-term for the referent of the first-person pronoun. For Sartre, the “I” could not be residing inside consciousness since consciousness has no inside. If the “I” exists, it can only exist “outside, in the world ” (Sartre 2004a: 1; emphasis in the original).

Sartre asserts that the “I” appears in reflection, it presents itself to us, it is given to our intuition; hence, it could not be easily dismissed as an accident of our grammar, or a fig Bent of cultural imagination. He effectively undermines, though, the view that the ego is always present in our mental life, lurking behind every conscious move: the “I” arises when consciousness turns its attention to its acts, and thinks of a particular being as the locus of certain passions or actions. The overall point of his discussion is that if conscious Jean-Paul Sartre Bess is to be a genuine transcendence toward the world, then the ego of philosophical tra Edition ought to be transcended. The unity of our consciousness as a whole is found not in an ego, but in the temporal interplay of our sensations, thoughts, and affects: “conscious Bess refers constantly back to itself, whoever says ‘a consciousness’ means the whole of consciousness” ( Sartre 2004a: 39).

When it is narrated, our experience is considered under certain headings, such as “quail ties of character,” “acts,” and “states.” A psychic state appears when a reflective con sciousness turns its attention on past conscious activities and surveys those conscious Fesses under the heading of particular concepts. However, in a reversal of actual prior ties, the reflectively created state is taken to underlie one’s feelings, thoughts, and ac sons. The state misleadingly appears as the principle that ties together various activities of consciousness, and holds the meaning of one’s relation to the world. The analysis of that relation becomes an exploration of the allegedly hidden meaning of conscious expert Once. Our feelings, thoughts, and actions provide clues to the mechanics of each psychic state that acts on the agent as a physical force, accounting for her past attitude and con ditioning her future stance. Hence, the alleged aim of the scientist is to uncover the meaning of the state through the psychoanalysis of verbal and physical behavior. On this point, cognitive psychology and classical psychoanalysis concur in their view of psychic states as entities to which the agent can have only restricted access, and over which she may enjoy very limited control. The vocabulary of passivity that permeates much of the folk and scientific discourse on emotions reflects a conception of human beings as gov earned by entities dwelling somewhere between the (p. 37) spontaneous activities of the stream of consciousness, and the bodily constitution of our interaction with the world. That space in between the mental and the physical is that of the psychological, whose dual character speaks to the paradoxical nature of psychic states: passive yet purposive, involuntary but intentional, evaluative no less than physiological. A further, and even deeper problem, for Sartre, is that zooming in on psychic states produces theoretical short-sightedness: psychic states cannot be studied independently of human nature and the world, since the psychic facts that we meet in our research are never prior: “they, in their essential structure, are reactions of man to the world: they therefore presuppose man and the world, and cannot take on their true meaning unless those two notions have first been elucidated” ( Sartre 2004b: 7–8).

The Phenomenology of Emotional Experience Sartre’s critique of the reification of psychic states paves the way for his original account of emotional experience. An emotion is not a clog of mental machinery, but how the whole of consciousness operates in a certain situation. During an emotional episode, one’s Bela son to the world is “magically” transformed by means of one’s body. The world is under stood as a totality of phenomena linked by a complex network of references to each other. In the world of daily activity, we experience reality as a combination of demands and af fordances; the link between them is experienced as ruled by deterministic processes be tween causes and effects. The “instrumental world” of action is captured in the “pragmat Jean-Paul Sartre ic intuition” of the situation that makes certain moves available for the subject, while denying her others. For Sartre, the world encountered in emotional experience—what we characterize as a “hateful,” “joyful,” or “bleak” world—is distinguished from the instr mental world. The agent’s response in an emotional episode engages the overall stance and physiology of the body not to effect material changes in the world, but to alter her perception of reality, and, through that, her relation to the world: “during emotion, it is the body which, directed by the consciousness, changes its relationship to the world so that the world should change its qualities” ( Sartre 2004b: 41).

To appreciate the significance of Sartre’s phenomenological approach to emotions, it is important to grasp Sartre’s argumentation against two prominent alternative accounts, on the one hand, the James-Mange Deductively naturalistic model and, on the other, the classical psychoanalytic view of emotional phenomena.

Critique of Reductive Naturalism about Emo # sons Sartre conceives of his sketch for a theory of the emotions as an experiment in phenom nological psychology. Its subject matter is the human being in her situation, and its object Dive is to identify the essence of emotional phenomena by showing how embodied con sciousness constitutes their meaning.

(p. 38) The meaning of an emotion is the main casualty in the first classic theory Sartre examines. The “Peripheric” theory is thus called because it locates the source of the emo son in the periphery of mental activity, namely in the body. According to the reductionist version of that theory, as put forward by William James and Carl Mange, the feeling of so masc changes as they occur is the emotion. The reductionist theory maps emotions to bodily feelings. However, the model is subject to the charge of irrelevance: even if the bodily changes occurring in feeling jealous, for instance, are a synthesis of all the bodily changes occurring in feeling angry, sad, disgusted, and afraid, it is not on the basis of be ing (positionally) aware of such bodily changes that one is (non-positionally) aware of feeling jealous. Rather it is by focusing on the manifest features of the world—the smirk in her face, her unpersuasive excuses—that one is attributing betrayal to the other, and jealousy to oneself. If jealousy should be identified with perception it would be the per caption of her dismissive gesture, not of the change in the location of your diaphragm.

The distinction between the two types of awareness shows the force and the subtlety of the Sartrean critique. Sartre’s complaint is not that, for example, in feeling jealous one is not undergoing any bodily processes. His criticism is that when one is focusing on an emotion, one finds “something more and something else ” than mere physiological processes (Sartre 2004b: 15; emphasis in the original). Something more, since however much information one accumulates about the mechanics of bodily events, one is none the wiser as to which, if any, of the emotions these events pick out, in the absence of any in formation about how the agent perceives, evaluates, or responds to the salient features of Jean-Paul Sartre a situation. And something else, since however much a bodily state is perturbed in an emotional occurrence, the physiological disturbance cannot account for the disturbing character of emotional experience. For instance, part of the explanation for the discrep Ency between a (positional) awareness of pulse rate, and a (non-positional) awareness of terror is that the former is exhausted by the perception of modifications in one’s body, while the latter denotes a “relation between our psychic being and the world.” That Bela son is not an arbitrary product of “quantitative, continuous modifications of vegetative states,” but the realization of an “organized and describable structure” that involves the human being in a situation (Sartre 2004b: 17).

The Peripheric theory locates emotion on the inner side of bodily experience, at the cost of leaving the agent’s relation to the world outside the theory’s preview. Cut off from the rest of reality, emotion becomes a self-enclosed, private, internal affair of someone who is subject to bodily perturbations. Hence, emotion is deprived of its significance: the theory accounts neither for what the emotion indicates for the life of the person who is angry, jealous, or joyous, nor for what his anger, jealousy, or joy is really about (Hatzimoysis 2011: 41–77).

Critique of the Classical Psychoanalytic # Metatheory Sartre’s phenomenological discourse is opposed to a major principle of classical psycho analysis: the postulation of unconscious emotions, or other non-conscious states, as ex placatory entities of human phenomena. The importance of interpretations generated (p. 39) during the psychoanalytic process is not questioned by Sartre. What he doubts is the validity of the metapsychological interpretation of the practice. As Sartre understands it, the psychoanalytic theory dissociates the phenomenon analyzed from its signification. What the phenomenon allegedly signifies is the repressed state that, unbeknownst to the subject, produces the behavior under consideration. The relation between the behavior and its signification is supposed to be that between an effect and its cause. The former depends on the latter for its production, but, like all causally related items, they are dis tint things that may exist separately from each other. It is claimed by classical psychoan alysts that the repressed desire that causes the behavior lies outside the domain of con scions engagement with the world. Accordingly, an examination of how an agent expert Fences a situation will not enable us to understand her behavior without invoking a metatheory of causal connections that designates fixed relations between the events un der consideration and their alleged sources.

Whatever the metaphysical credentials of a theory of psychic causality, the problem is that it undermines the very practice that it is supposed to sustain. Viewing human con duct as passively produced by forces that lie outside the domain of meaningful activity is in clear tension with the analytic practice of looking into the particular features of a situ son, as these are conveyed by the analysand’s communication, in order to interpret her behavior. And it is precisely this tension, between the practitioner’s search for meaning Jean-Paul Sartre and the theoreticians’ postulation of fixed causal relations that erodes the foundations of the psychoanalytic approach to emotions: “The profound contradiction in all psychoanaly sis is that it presents at the same time a bond of causality and a bond of understanding between the phenomena that it studies. These two types of relationship are incompati ble” (Sartre 2004b: 32–33).

Meaningful behavior cannot be interpreted satisfactorily by an appeal to unconscious causes, not so much because they are unconscious, but because they are causes. Howe er, casting doubts about the unconscious need not be followed by a declaration of mental transparency. Sartre only asserts that the signification of an emotional phenomenon should be sought in our engagement with the world. This does not mean that “the signify cation must be perfectly explicit. There are many possible degrees of condensation and of clarity” (Sartre 2004b: 31–32).

Existential Psychoanalysis Bringing our ever present, yet non-thematized, self-awareness into the light, articulating our pre-reflective consciousness into an explicit narrative about how we view the world, is a task for existentialist psychoanalysis, that is, Sartre’s invention of a therapeutic method grounded on his ontology of conscious being (Sartre 2003: part fourth).

Consciousness is non-positionally conscious of itself, it is a “being-for-itself,” a being that is a presence to itself, and thus, a being that is always at a distance from itself; that dis Dance is impossible to cross, precisely because—not being some physical distance—it is nothing. That nothingness is the hallmark of our way of being, which—contrary to the reifying metaphors of both idealist and materialist metaphysics—is not a thing, but a con sciousness of things. A being-in-itself, such as a table or a chair, is a plenitude of being, identical to itself, always being what it is; a conscious being, marked by a distance to it self, is a lack of being, non-identical to what it is (Hatzimoysis 2011: 23–39).

(p. 40) The constant striving of acquiring identity, of becoming one with oneself, not as an inert object, but as a free agent, marks each conscious being’s unique way of being, and constitutes her fundamental project—what she makes herself to be in and through the way she responds to the world. Each person’s fundamental project is a unique and freely chosen way of becoming oneself, in her unceasing attempt to solve the problem of how to be something complete and at one with oneself, while being a free agent, always throw ing herself out of her past toward the future.

The responsibility that comes with the realization that we are free, that even not to choose, in certain circumstances, is just the choice to not choose, is for many people too much to bear, and is thus masked through attempts to live in bad faith. Often assimilated to the epistemic phenomenon of self-deception, bad faith could be better understood as a project of falsely identifying oneself either with one’s facticity—whatever about one’s past, one’s body, or one’s historical reality cannot be otherwise—or with one’s transcend Fence —the ability to constantly move beyond one’s present being, toward an as yet un Jean-Paul Sartre formed self. Identifying with one’s facticity allows one to think of oneself not as an agent, but as an overdetermined subject, thus rescinding any responsibility for how one lives. Al ternatively, identifying oneself with pure transcendence allows one to pretend that one’s choices are unrelated to the economic, social, political, or cultural facts of one’s actual situation.

Existentialist psychoanalysis aims to help the analysand grow out of her immersion into bad faith, and toward an authentic way of being (Sartre 2003: 94n). As a therapeutic method, it purports to help the patient move away from impure reflection—that is, the common tendency to conceive oneself as an object, with fixed properties, which suppose Idly determine the course of one’s life, and toward a purifying reflection that makes the agent recognize the network of rationalizations, convenient oversights, and deliberate ex culpations, which have led the patient to gradually trap herself into a distorted self-im age.

We have to acknowledge that we are normative beings, that our identities are formed by the commitments we undertake to act, think, or respond Effectively in certain ways—to acknowledge that a conscious being “ has to be what it is” (Sartre 2003: 21; emphasis in the original). We also have to face up to the particular commitments each one of us has, as these can be revealed by an opening to our own experience of the phenomena, to the way the world—with its challenges, affordances, and rewards—appear to ourselves, given the projects in which our situated freedom unfolds.

That opening to the phenomena forms the ground of existentialist psychoanalysis, which, according to Sartre, differs from traditional psychoanalysis in at least three respects: it encourages flexibility, as it denies that there is a fixed therapeutic protocol, serviceable for all types of patients, irrespective of the particularities of their situation; it promotes the collaboration of analyst and analysand, so as to undermine the myth of the patient’s passivity, while increasing awareness of the shared responsibility for what transpires in a therapeutic context; and, finally, as the therapy progresses over time, it gives the subject’s own “intuition” of her experience an important role, over the ready-made inter pretations supplied in the analyst’s textbooks (2003: 594).

Training in existential psychoanalysis is itself a demanding process, requiring no less than a secure grasp of phenomenological analysis of the concrete existence, that is, the embodied “human being-in-situation,” in its three ontological dimensions of being-in-it self, being-for-itself, and being-for-others (Sartre 2003: 27).

(p. 41) The overall principle of existential psychoanalysis is that each agent is a totality and not a collection, and thus she expresses herself even in the most insignificant or su perficial of her behaviors: “there is not a taste, a mannerism, or a human act which is not revealing... A gesture refers to a Weltanschauung and we sense it” (2003: 479). Its goal is to decode and interpret the behavioral patterns, so as to articulate them conceptually. Its point of departure is the pre-reflective awareness of lived experience. And its overall goal is to reach not some past psychic complex, but the choice that renders meaningful how one lives—so that the analysand achieves authenticity, owning up to the projects Jean-Paul Sartre through which she, as a situated freedom, is making herself into the person she is (Sartre 2003: 589–593). Bibliography Cannon B.. Sartre and Psychoanalysis. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. Hatzimoysis A.. The Philosophy of Sartre. Durham: Acumen. Sartre J.-P.. “Intentionality: A Fundamental Idea in Husserl’s Phenomenolo gy”, trans. J. Fell. Journal of the British Society of Phenomenology 1: 4–5. Sartre J-P.. The Family Idiot: Gustav Flaubert, 1821–1857 vol. 1, trans. C. Conman. Chicago: Chicago University Press. Sartre J.-P.. War Diaries: Notebooks from a Honey War 1939–40, trans. Q. Hare. London: Verso. Sartre J.-P.. Nausea, trans. R. Baldick. London: Penguin Classics. Sartre J.-P.. Being and Nothingness, trans. H. Barnes. London: Rutledge. Sartre J.-P. (2004a). The Transcendence of the Ego, trans. A. Brown. London: Rout ledge. Sartre J.-P. (2004b) Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions, trans. P. Market. London: Rutledge. Sartre J-P. (2004c). The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of the Imagination, trans. J. Weber. London: Rutledge. Weber J.. The Existentialism of Jean-Paul Sartre. New York: Rutledge.

Anthony Hatzimoysis Anthony Hatzimoysis is Assistant Professor at the HPS Department of the University of Athens. His main philosophical interests are in the theory of value, and the nature of self‐consciousness in both the analytical and phenomenological schools of thought.

He is the editor of Philosophy and the Emotions; he is currently completing a monograph on The Philosophy of Sartre (Acumen), and is editing a volume on Self‐Knowledge (Oxford University Press).

Anthony Hatzimoysis Anthony Hatzimoysis is Assistant Professor at the HPS Department of the University of Athens. His main philosophical interests are in the theory of value, and the nature of self‐consciousness in both the analytical and phenomenological schools of thought.

He is the editor of Philosophy and the Emotions; he is currently completing a monograph on The Philosophy of Sartre (Acumen), and is editing a volume on Self‐Knowledge (Oxford University Press).

Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology # Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology Maxine Sheets-Johnston The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter begins with a brief biography of Merleau-Monty and then sets forth eight condensed perspectives on Merleau-Monty’s relationship to phenomenology and psy chopathology: Assessing Merleau-Monty’s Writings in Psychopathology; Cezanne’s Doubt and Merleau-Monty’s Doubt; Merleau-Monty’s Ambiguous Way of Life; Sexuality and Ambit gusty; Freudian Influences and Merleau-Monty’s Existential Analyses;: Merleau-Monty’s Analysis of Schneider; Puzzles about Touching and the Touched; Back to Cezanne. The eight condensed perspectives highlight fundamental themes in Merleau-Monty’s phenom nology and in his psychopathological analyses at the same time as they highlight fund mental questions and concerns that arise in an examination of these themes. The fund mental themes emerge first in an assessment of how Merleau-Monty’s writings on psy chopathology are both exceptional and non-exceptional and in the end in a question about the possible confluence of what Merleau-Monty describes as Cezanne’s “creative liberty” and Merleau-Monty’s own creative liberty Keywords: Gel and Goldstein, doubt, ambiguity, sexuality, Schneider, touching/touched relationship, existential analysis # A Brief Biography of Merleau-Monty MERLEAU-PONTY was born on March 14, 1908, in Rochefort-sur-Mer, France. He was raised by his mother, his father having died when Merleau-Monty was five years old. After completing his secondary schooling and studies at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in Paris, Mer lo-Monty was a student at the École Normal Supérieure where he met Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir. He attended the “Paris Lectures” of Edmund Husserl in 1929 and received his agréCation in philosophy in 1930. In 1934, he was given a permanent professorship at a lycée in Chartres and had his first article—“Christianity and Ressenti Bent ”—published in 1935. He was conscripted in 1939 and served briefly as a lieutenant in an infantry regiment. In 1940 he returned to teaching at a lycée in Paris and later that Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology year married Suzanne Bethe Jolibois. Their only child, Marianne Merleau-Monty, was born in June 1941. In 1945, Merleau-Monty defended his major doctoral thesis, “Phenom nology of Perception,” and, with Sartre, Beauvoir, and others, founded Les temps mod ernes. In 1949 he was appointed Professor of Child Psychology and Pedagogy at the Uni versité de Paris, Sorbonne, and in 1952 was elected Chair of Philosophy at the College de France. From 1935 onward, in addition to writing several books, he wrote a number of ar tiles, many of which are included in The Primacy of Perception and Sens et Non-sens. He continued teaching as well as writing, teaching in particular courses on Nature, until his death on May 3, 1961. He died of coronary thrombosis. Several of his writings, including The Visible and the Invisible, were published posthumously.

(p. 43) Assessing Merleau-Monty’s Writings in Psy # chopathology Merleau-Monty’s writings in psychopathology were both exceptional and non-exceptional. They were exceptional in bringing scientific research into phenomenology. Husserl had written from time to time on the abnormal—for example, in Ideas second, Husserl considers what transpires when a particular sense organ no longer functions normally while others continue to do so (Husserl 1989: 71ff.)—but he dissociative identity disorder not delve into the psychopathological. Heidegger too might be cited: the “they” might be viewed as metaphysically abnormal, the “they” being those who repress recognition of their own mortality, who see death as happening only to others, and whom Heidegger deems “inauthentic”. Merleau-Monty, in contrast, delved into contemporary studies of psychopathology, in par titular, the extensive studies of Kurt Goldstein and Adhémar Gel. He also based his own psychopathological analyses on the writings of Sigmund Freud even as he diverged from them. Thus one might say that he devoted himself assiduously to available contemporary literature in the then burgeoning fields of neuropsychiatry and psychoanalysis.

The writings of Merleau-Monty were non-exceptional in that Merleau-Monty was not the only philosopher to take up the studies of Gel and Goldstein. Indeed, Merleau-Monty drew on the writings of Ernst Cassirer in his own investigations, sometimes without due citation. A remarkable difference exists between the two philosophers. While Merleau- Monty read the writings of Gel and Goldstein, Cassirer visited the Frankfurt Neurological Institute where Gel and Goldstein conducted their research. He observed patients at the Institute and even had “frequent conversations” with a patient (unnamed, but quite likely Schneider, a patient whose spatial sense of his own body, including its orientation, was se Merely damaged, and whose capacities and lack thereof were at the time taken to be basic to phenomenological understandings of the body and space) (Cassirer 1957: 239). It is not surprising, then, that Goldstein cites Cassirer substantively in his own writings. Cassirer’s citations of Goldstein and Gel in support of his differential ing “active space” and “symbolic space” are of particular interest insofar as they mirror Goldstein and Gel’s original distinction, and in turn, Merleau-Monty’s distinction, be tween concrete movement and abstract movement. Cassirer states, “Certain experiments Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology dealing with pathological modifications in the spatial consciousness... show that many persons[,] whose ability to recognize spatial forms and to interpret them objectively is gravely impaired[,] can perform highly complex spatial tasks if these can be approached in another way, through certain movements and ‘kinesthetic’ perceptions” ( Cassirer 1957: 153 n. 10). Cassirer’s conclusion in which he cites studies of blind persons—“we must conceive the ‘space’ of the blind not as a representative image-space but primarily as a dynamic ‘behavior space’, a definite field of action and movement” (1957: 153 n. 10)— reads in its structure and “must” as if it could have come from (p. 44) the later hand of Merleau-Monty (see e.g. 1962: xvi, 254; 1968: 134). Merleau-Monty in fact echoes Cassirer’s recognition of “movements and ‘kinesthetic’ perceptions,” and a “ ‘behavior space’ ” when he introduces the idea of “the body in face of its task” (1962: 100), though without giving prominence to kinesthesia. The sensory modality to which Merleau-Monty attaches primary significance is vision, and this not only in taking up Gel and Goldstein’s specifications of concrete and abstract movement and in his own specification of “the spa tiality of the situation” (1962: 100) with respect to Schneider, the patient on whom he fo cuties, but in his later writings in The Visible and the Invisible in which he draws far more extensively on Freud.

Cezanne’s Doubt and Merleau-Monty’s Doubt Merleau-Monty’s article “Cezanne’s Doubt” is a blueprint of Merleau-Monty’s own doubt, and in turn, a blueprint of his philosophy of existence. In other words, what Merleau-Pon ty construes in his psychoanalytic diagnosis of Cezanne and how he construes it are re Elected in his own personally tinged psychoanalytic philosophy. Psychoanalytic diagnosis and philosophy are indeed intertwined. For example, Merleau-Monty states, “My point of view: a philosophy, like a work of art, is an object that can arouse more thoughts than those that are ‘contained’ in it.... [Like a work of art, a philosophy] retains a meaning outside of its historical context, even has a meaning only outside of that context” (1968: 199). Merleau-Monty’s chosen title, “Cezanne’s Doubt,” exemplifies this “point of view.” While Descartes’s famous methodological doubt is epistemologically oriented, Cezanne’s methodological doubt is artistically oriented. The doubts, however, are essentially and ex istentially intertwined: both Descartes and Cezanne broke away from tradition, Descartes with respect to philosophy, Cezanne with respect to art. What may surely be termed Mer lo-Monty’s doubt, as evidenced in Phenomenology of Perception, centers in part on Sartre’s ontological Being and Nothingness, on what Sartre describes as the in-itself and the for-itself, or in other words, on what Merleau-Monty sees as divisionary thinking that admits no middle ground, and on what he proceeds to centralize in ambiguity. His specif ic methodological doubt, however, is tethered exclusively to Husserl. As Albert Rail points out, “Merleau-Monty’s method was drawn from a variety of sources among which he made few distinctions” ( Rail 1967: 164). He earlier astutely observes, “It is interest ing that the preface to Phenomenology of Perception can be read independently of the body of that book. There is no attempt to apply the phenomenological method as it is out Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology lined to the descriptions of experience which abound there” (1967: 62). Phenomenologist and phenomenological historian Herbert Spiegelberg makes a similar observation: How far can Merleau-Monty’s writings be considered to be demonstrations of the phenomenological method? This is not an easy question to answer. Few if any of his texts read like protocols of phenomenological research. The reason is not only that he usually starts out from a critical discussion of the traditional views. Most of the presentation of his own position takes the form of simple assertions of find Dings that he seems to have made long before. Rarely does he carry out the anally sis before our very eyes or invite us to look with him at the phenomena (p. 45) by a methodical and painstaking investigation. Instead, he gives us his results readymade, leaving it to us to do our own verifying.

(Spiegelberg 1971: 559)

Merleau-Monty’s methodological insistence on finding and describing a reversibility (chi asm, Ineinander, intertwining) that sustains ambiguity is readily evident in “Cezanne’s Doubt”: There is a rapport between Cezanne’s schizoid temperament and his work be cause the work reveals a metaphysical sense of the disease: a way of seeing the world reduced to the totality of frozen appearances, with all expressive values sus pended. Thus illness ceases to be an absurd fact and a fate and becomes a general possibility of human existence. It becomes so when this existence bravely faces one of its paradoxes, the phenomenon of expression. In this sense to be schizoid and to be Cezanne come to the same thing. It is therefore impossible to separate creative liberty from that behavior... already evident in Cezanne’s first gestures as a child and in the way he reacted to things. (1964: 20–21)

This same intertwining describes sexuality and existence.

Merleau-Monty’s Ambiguous Way of Life Merleau-Monty writes of the “interfusion between sexuality and existence” (1962: 169). He states, “[A]s an ambiguous atmosphere, sexuality is co-extensive with life. In other words, ambiguity is of the essence of human existence, and everything we live or think has always several meanings” (1962: 169). A puzzling and at the same time highly sug Festive remark concerning sexuality follows. Merleau-Monty observes, “A way of life—an attitude of escapism and the need of solitude—is perhaps a generalized expression of a certain state of sexuality” (1962: 169). That “certain state of sexuality” remains uneluci dated, though Merleau-Monty proceeds to remark: In thus becoming transformed into existence, sexuality has taken upon itself so general a significance, the sexual theme has contrived to be for the subject the oc cation for so many accurate and true observations in themselves, of so many ratio ally based decisions, and it has become so loaded with the passage of time that it Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology is an impossible undertaking to seek, within the framework of sexuality, the expla nation of the framework of existence. The fact remains that this existence is the act of taking up and making explicit a sexual situation, and that in this way it has always at least a double sense. (1962: 169)

“[A]n attitude of escapism” and “the need of solitude” are a striking “way of life” in light of commentaries about Merleau-Monty. At the very beginning of his Preface to Merleau- Monty’s Signs, Richard McCleary states, “[Merleau-Monty] was well enough known in the cosmopolitan world he comments on in Signs, but the studied wall of solitude he built about him made it hard for even intimates to know him” ( McCleary 1964: ix). In fact, Mc Bleary states, “He kept his distance,” though “from that distance he made men won der... [h]is studied anonymity became at times intensely personal” (1964: ix). He fur thermore remarks on what Merleau-Monty himself would designate as his personal “style”: Merleau-Monty’s “stage is a shifting world, which he sees according to his own lights”; Merleau-Monty “is simply trying (p. 46) to express more clearly the experience he shares with other men, who cannot put it into words and yet are vital to his effort”; Mer lo-Monty is “searching for himself by questioning his world. We hear him learning ‘to speak with his own voice’ ” (1964: x). A comment by Spiegelberg runs along similar lines: Usually the writings of Merleau-Monty avoid the first person singular. This is hard ly [an] accident. The focus of his thought is not on the ego, but on the phenom non ahead, the Sake. It is therefore not surprising that Merleau-Monty has not yet given any autobiographical statement nor has any formulation of his comprehend chive plans or guiding motifs appeared.... Perhaps the most revealing among the titles of Merleau-Monty’s books to appear thus far is that of the collection of his es says, Sens et non-sens.

(Spiegelberg 1971: 524).

It is notable that Spiegelberg goes on to point out, “Merleau-Monty’s thought has been called a ‘Philosophy of Ambiguity’ ” (1971: 524–525). Does a certain “way of life” with its “attitude of escapism and the need of solitude” constitute the “thought” that personally motivates a philosophy of ambiguity?

Sexuality and Ambiguity We see across the whole of Merleau-Monty’s developing existential analyses the concept al bond between intertwining and ambiguity that is everywhere descriptive of life. A nov elastic biographer might interpret this conceptual bond psychoanalytically. Merleau- Monty’s focal concern with Freud’s sexually based psychoanalytic and Freud’s notion of overdetermination (discussed particularly in Freud’s writings on dreams) might add to the hypothetical interpretive sketch. In particular, a novelistic biographer might interpret Merleau-Monty’s elaborations of Freud’s sexually based psychoanalytic and notion of overdetermination together with his own existential analyses that anchor our lives in an interfusion of sexuality and existence, in ambiguity, in a prepersonal I, and in the agony Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology Nous—all of them central concepts in Merleau-Monty’s writings—as living in the teal lunge of a bisexual orientation, what might be described as an inescapable Ineinander, surely a challenge given the time and the academic contexts in which he lived. The dialed tic of sexuality that he describes as “the tending of an existence toward another existence which denies it, and yet without which it is not sustained,” and his claim that “Sexuality conceals itself from itself beneath a mask of generality, and continually tries to escape from the tension and drama which it sets up” (1962: 168) lend a certain credence to the hypothetical sketch. Moreover taking up Freud’s notion of overdetermination, Merleau- Monty writes, “The ‘associations’ of psychoanalysis are in reality ‘rays’ of time and of the world.... there is no association that comes into play unless there is overdetermination, that is, a relation of relations, a coincidence that cannot be fortuitous, that has an Nominal [presumably meaning ‘portentous’] sense. The tacit Cogito ‘thinks’ only overdetermina sons” (1968: 240).

If one were to take up the novelistic biographer’s hypothetical sketch, not to convince anyone of its truth, but to show that one’s quest to be true to the truths of experience may well be shadowed by one’s own life challenges, and indeed in a way precisely as Mer lo-Monty details in his conception of the invisible and of the unconscious—the “tacit Cogito”—one (p. 47) might furthermore bring out in illuminating ways how historical Mimi Cations play into one’s conceptual and theoretical perspectives and have the possibility of skewing one’s analyses. Laban’s notion of the “mirror image,” for example, is front and center in Merleau-Monty’s developmental writings on infants and children; the term “body image” (from neurologist Henry Head’s original writings) is front and center in Merleau- Monty’s elucidation of pathological bodies. As Martin Dillon astutely notes, “The term ‘im age’ is ill suited for its function insofar as it suggests an exclusively visual or represent son form of awareness” ( Dillon 1978: 98 n. 6; see also Sheets-Johnston 2005). As noted earlier, a visual awareness predominates in Merleau-Monty’s writings. It is in fact central throughout his analyses, a fact that explains not simply the prominence of the invisible, but the chasm of the visible and the invisible and their ambiguous relationship.

If one were to take up the novelistic biographer’s hypothetical sketch, not to convince anyone of its truth, but to show that one’s quest to be true to the truths of experience may well be shadowed by one’s own life challenges, and indeed in a way precisely as Mer lo-Monty details in his conception of the invisible and of the unconscious—the “tacit Cogito”—one (p. 47) might furthermore bring out in illuminating ways how historical Mimi Cations play into one’s conceptual and theoretical perspectives and have the possibility of skewing one’s analyses. Laban’s notion of the “mirror image,” for example, is front and center in Merleau-Monty’s developmental writings on infants and children; the term “body image” (from neurologist Henry Head’s original writings) is front and center in Merleau- Monty’s elucidation of pathological bodies. As Martin Dillon astutely notes, “The term ‘im age’ is ill suited for its function insofar as it suggests an exclusively visual or represent son form of awareness” ( Dillon 1978: 98 n. 6; see also Sheets-Johnston 2005). As noted earlier, a visual awareness predominates in Merleau-Monty’s writings. It is in fact central throughout his analyses, a fact that explains not simply the prominence of the invisible, but the chasm of the visible and the invisible and their ambiguous relationship.

In brief, Merleau-Monty anchors our lives in ambiguity, in a prepersonal I, in the agony Nous, and in an overdetermined tacit Cogito’s thinking by which “any entity can be ac centuated as an emblem of Being” (1968: 270), in which the unconscious “[is] to be un derstood on the basis of the flesh” (1968: 270), in which “every analysis that “ disentan Ales renders unintelligible” (1968: 268), and in an overarching “interfusion of sexuality and existence, which means that existence permeates sexuality and vice versa, so that it is impossible to determine in a given decision or action, the proportion of sexual to other motivations, impossible to label a decision or act ‘sexual’ or ‘non-sexual’ ” (1962: 169).

Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology # Freudian Influences and Merleau-Monty’s Xis # tential Analyses To an interesting degree, Merleau-Monty’s developmental journey within his discipline fol lows that of Freud within his. Both Merleau-Monty and Freud were thoroughly cognizant of the existing knowledge and goals of their respective disciplines, but wanted to develop that knowledge and those goals not along further lines but along different lines. As psy chiatrist Edward Nersessian notes in his essay on the concept of signal anxiety, Freud “boldly broke new ground in his attempts to understand human suffering both scientific ally and imaginatively” ( Nersessian 2013/2015: 173/827). Nersessian points out specif ally that: As a medical doctor and euro-pathologist, Freud’s primary goal was the advance Bent of science.... At a certain point, however, around 1923, he found the sci Once of his day to be too limiting and restrictive, and he moved beyond the con fines of that body of knowledge, creating his own anatomy of the mind as an alter native to the established functional anatomy of the brain. This break allowed his imagination to move freely with little constraint. (2013/2015: 173/827)

In a similar way, Merleau-Monty wanted to advance phenomenological studies that he found limited and restrictive, particularly with respect to Husserl’s phenomenological methodology and Sartre’s ontology, and in turn moved to create his own existential anally ses that were initially fortified by scientific studies of behavior and of psychopathology. Just as Freud “forged his way forward undeterred by what we today call confirmation bias” (ibid.), so Merleau-Monty forged his way forward undeterred by the fact that no method existed by (p. 48) which his studies and conclusions could be confirmed. Indeed, as we have seen with respect to Phenomenology of Perception, “There is no attempt to apply the phenomenological method as it is outlined to the descriptions of experience which abound there” ( Rail 1967: 62).

Not only are Merleau-Monty’s analyses methodologically akin to Freud’s self-analysis in their idiosyncratic line of thought, but his basic concepts are offshoots of Freud’s and in some instances even grounded in Freud’s. For example, after remarking on how “much remains to be done to draw from psychoanalytic experience all that it contains,” and after giving as an example the fact that “In order to account for that osmosis between the body’s anonymous life and the person’s official life which is Freud’s great discovery, it was necessary to introduce something between the organism and our selves considered as a sequence of deliberate acts and express understandings,” Merleau-Monty states, “This was Freud’s unconscious ” (1964: 229).

Merleau-Monty does not leave the concept of the unconscious intact, but declares, “we still have to find the right formulation for what he intended by this provisional design son” (1964: 229). He reformulates Freud’s notion in a way that strikingly accords with Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology his own philosophy: “In an approximative language, Freud is on the point of discovering what other thinkers have more appropriately named ambiguous perception ” (1964: 229).

Merleau-Monty’s Analysis of Schneider Merleau-Monty takes up Schneider’s pathological condition, his ability to execute “[c]Concrete movements and acts of grasping,” such movements and acts “enjoy[ing] a privileged position,” and his inability to execute abstract movements such as pointing (1962: 103). The patient, Merleau-Monty concludes, is aware “neither of the stimulus nor of his reaction: quite simply he is his body and his body is the potentiality of a certain world” (1962: 106). This world-centered body is actually “the body in face of its tasks,” the body that Merleau-Monty terms the prepersonal phenomenal everyday body. Thus in spite of his disclaimer that the normal is not deduced from the abnormal, Merleau-Monty deduces the normal from the abnormal. In particular, possible bodily variations—a body that is “without hands, feet, head... and, a fortiori a sexless man,” and more broadly, a man lacking “all human ‘functions’, from sexuality to motility and intelligence” (1962: 170)—variations that Dillon points out in clarifying Merleau-Monty’s troubled assertion in the context of his examination of “the case of Schneider” that “[e]Everything in man is a necessity” (1962: 170), all these variations allow Merleau-Monty “to reveal the normal through departures from it” ( Dillon 1980: 78). In fact, Dillon remarks, “In a later essay, ‘Phenomenology and the Sciences of Man’..., Merleau-Monty makes this very point about the correlation between Husserlian eidetics [essences] and the ‘inductive’ methodology of the empirical sciences” (1980: 78).

Notable in Merleau-Monty’s linking of Schneider’s spontaneous concrete movement with normal everyday movement is not only his deduction of the normal from the pathological, but his passing over of any recognition of learning. We are not born with all those every day adult abilities specified and described in terms of concrete movement—for example, the very basic capacity to grasp. As normal human infants, we all learn our bodies and learn to move ourselves (Sheets-Johnston 1999/exp. 2nd edn. 2011). Following remarks on abstract (p. 49) movement—“The patient, like the scientist, verifies mediately and clari Dies his hypothesis by cross-checking facts, and makes his way blindly toward the one which co-ordinates them all” (1962: 131)—Merleau-Monty goes on to affirm a “world-cen treed body,” hence the difference between concrete and abstract movement in terms of perception: “This procedure [that patient and scientist go through] contrasts with, and by so doing throws into relief, the spontaneous method of normal perception, that kind of living system of meanings which makes the concrete essence of the object immediately recognizable, and allows its ‘sensible properties’ to appear only the through that essence” (1962: 131).

Merleau-Monty, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology # Puzzles about the Touching and the Touched In The Visible and the Invisible, Merleau-Monty links seer and seen with touching and touched. The example he gives of the reversibility of seer and seen is rooted in tactility: “We must habituate ourselves to think that every visible is cut out in the tangible”; “we know that... vision is a palpation with the look” (1968: 134). He goes on to affirm that “the thickness of flesh between the seer and the thing is constitutive for the thing of its visibility as for the seer of his corporeity,” and further, that “What we call a visible is... a quality pregnant with a texture, the surface of a depth” (1968: 136). In all his descrip sons and examples of the visible, a distinctively I–world relationship obtains. In striking contrast, an I–world relationship is absent in his singular example and description of tac Utility. In its stead is the left hand touching the right hand: “a veritable touching of the touch, when my right hand touches my left hand while it is palpating the things, where the ‘touching subject’ passes over to the rank of the touched” (1968: 133–134). What is odd and even puzzling is that there is not an intercorporeity example of touching and touched—a handshake, a pat on the back, even a kiss. What is odd and even puzzling too is that there are no definitive “things” that the left hand is “palpating,” and even why it is necessary to bring in “the things” since it is a question of the reversibility of touching and touched hands. An embrace would indeed seem a more everyday life example of the re versibility of touching and touched than what amounts to an I–I reversible relationship. We might in fact recall the remark of philosopher Marjorie Irene, an otherwise avowed aficionado of Merleau-Monty: “Every time I read him, I have, once more, the sense that his approach to philosophical problems is entirely, overwhelmingly right.... As with no other thinker, I say, yes, so it is—but what about that hand trick? Alas, I cannot make it work” ( Irene 1976: 619).

Back to Cezanne Is Merleau-Monty’s diagnosis of Cezanne a self-diagnosis as well, a divergence from trad son that engenders a new perspective and that seeks expression? Is there thus “a rap port” between Merleau-Monty’s “schizoid temperament and his work” as there is between Cezanne’s “schizoid temperament and his work”? In short, is Merleau-Monty’s “creative liberty” akin to that of Cezanne? In support of this possibility, consider that what Mer lo-Monty states as true of speech and expression is equally true of writing and expires ion: “The analysis of (p. 50) speech and expression brings home to us the enigmatic na Cure of our own body even more effectively than dissociative identity disorder our remarks on bodily space and uni ty” (1962: 197). PAGE_BREAK This chapter presents a biography of Simone de Beauvoir, a French existed titlist, author, and activist who produced her most important works in the field of phe nomenological psychopathology from the midto late-twentieth century. It examines Beauvoir’s unique approach to phenomenology, especially her ongoing concern with is sues of oppression, tyranny, and liberation, and her relationship to phenomenological psy chopathology. In particular, it describes Beauvoir’s nuanced understanding of and conned son to psychology and psychoanalysis. It also considers Beauvoir’s views on Jacques Laban’s notion of identity and Sigmund Freud’s conception of the fundamentally sexed nature of human experience, both of which she addressed in her book The Second Sex. Fi ally, it discusses Beauvoir’s arguments in The Second Sex and in another important study, Old Age [La Vieillesse ], about how women and the elderly are pathologized as Caber rant from the perspective of the dominant culture.

Keywords: phenomenological psychopathology, Simone de Beauvoir, phenomenology, psychology, psychoanalysis, Jacques Laban, The Second Sex, Old Age, women, elderly # Biography SIMONE de Beauvoir was a French existentialist, author, and activist who produced her most important works from the midto late-twentieth century. Influenced by earlier thinkers such as Edmund Husserl, Henri Bergson, Martin Heidegger, Emmanuel Kant, and G. W. F. Hegel, she developed a unique approach to phenomenology through her ongoing concern with issues of tyranny, oppression, and liberation. Although she often eschewed the title, “philosopher,” preferring instead to be considered a literary figure, she remains one of the most important philosophers of the twentieth century.

Simone de Beauvoir # Beauvoir’s Life Born on January 9, 1908, Beauvoir quickly proved to be intellectually motivated. She ex celled at school, passing the baccaluaréat exams in philosophy and mathematics in 1925. At the Sorbonne she engaged in a wide range of disciplines, including history, logic, ethics, sociology, and psychology, concluding her study with a graduate dialôme on Lab niz written under Lon Brunschvig. She went on to complete her teacher training at the lycée Hanson-de-Silly with fellow students, Maurice Merleau-Monty and Claude Lvi- Strauss, both of whom played significant roles in Beauvoir’s philosophical development. Beauvoir took second place in the philosophy agréCation exam (at twenty-one years of age, she was the youngest student ever to pass) losing to Jean-Paul Sartre, for whom it was the second attempt. Beauvoir was not an official student at the elite École Normal Superior, but she attended lectures there. During this time, she met a group of students, including Paul Nissan and Sartre, who invited her to study with them because of her intel lectual acuity. Thus began her lifelong involvement, intellectually and often romantically, with Sartre. Despite their relationship, Beauvoir and Sartre never married and had nu Serous other romantic commitments. Beauvoir herself (p. 52) had relationships with women and men, most notably, Jacques Cost, Nelson Algren, Claude Lanzmann, and Olga Kosakievicz, all of whom impacted her work in significant ways.

Beauvoir taught briefly but was dismissed from teaching in 1943 due to a complaint about student corruption. In the 1940s, she began publishing fiction, much of which pro ides a literary framework for the themes developed in her philosophy. During this decade, she also wrote two important works on existential ethics, Pyrrhus and Cinemas and The Ethics of Ambiguity, both of which underscore her lifelong dedica son to questions of morality.

Her engagement with phenomenology came to fruition in her 1949 book, The Second Sex. This work is often considered the bedrock of modern philosophical feminism and a signify cant advance in the area of phenomenology. Beauvoir was also active in founding and run Ding the journal, Les temps moderns, with Sartre and Merleau-Monty. She remained a prolific novelist, essayist, autobiographer, philosopher, and political activist (against French colonialization and in favor of women’s reproductive rights) until the end of her life. In 1970, she published another significant work in existential phenomenology, Old 1 2 Age. Beauvoir died on April 14, 1986.

Beauvoir’s Relationship to Phenomenological # Psychopathology Beauvoir’s relationship to phenomenological psychopathology revolves around her method—which is itself deeply phenomenological in most of her work—as well as her nu Inced understanding of and relationship to psychology and psychoanalysis. Unlike psy choanalysis, which seeks out the causes of abnormal symptoms, Beauvoir’s work is at its finest when she allows the so-called “abnormal” to speak for itself, and in so doing, to Simone de Beauvoir show that atypical behaviors are more often than not systematically produced and misun derstood, rather than markers of individual psychological aberration.

Despite her interest in psychology and psychoanalysis, as well as her learned treatment of many thinkers in these traditions, she dissociative identity disorder not claim to diagnose disorders in any ash ion, but rather to understand how various groups and individuals become marginalized and oppressed by dominant philosophical and political systems. Unlike Sartre, who early on rejects the unconscious as a strategy of bad faith, Beauvoir finds that psychoanalysis is not always a problematic discipline in providing descriptions of complex human behave Tors. This admiration is most evident in her depictions in The Second Sex of Jacques Laban’s notion of identity as largely formed through reflection and distortion through the other, and in her adoption of Freud’s conception of the fundamentally sexed nature of hu man experience (even as she staunchly opposes his sexism).

Beauvoir admires how psychoanalysis shows how “no factor intervenes in psychic life without having taken on human meaning; it is not the body-object described by scientists that exists concretely but the body lived by the subject” ( Beauvoir 2010: 49). She has in mind (p. 53) the particular role that sexuality plays in embodiment. For her, our expert Once is not determined by our unconscious libidinal drives; rather, it is constituted by our more basic desire “to connect concretely with existence through the whole world, grasped in all possible ways,” (2010: 56) which is not originally sexual in nature (al though sexuality is one of the primary ways in which experience is concertized).

But psychoanalysis is not without its major shortcomings. In The Second Sex, Beauvoir lambastes Freud for his lack of concern for the differences between men and women and his general grafting of the female to the masculine model of sexuality and personhood. She notes that Freud’s woman is merely a “modified man,” thus insufficiently describing her experience as a differently sexed being (Beauvoir 2010: 50). Beauvoir expands this problematic to the general rigidity evident in psychoanalysis regarding individual differ Fences and free choice. She explains that psychoanalysts maintain an intractable dedica son to deterministic forces which prevail unhindered regardless of individual and cultural vicissitudes. If action is determined by epic psychic structures and largely unknowable and unchangeable libidinal energies, then psychoanalysis must ultimately be rejected by existentialism with its emphasis on freedom and choice. True existential choice necessary ly requires a direct confrontation with the drives and prohibitions that lurk in the inter sections of mind and body, not a kind of fatalism regarding their power over human ac son. Thus, we must recover “the original intentionality of existence... Without going back to this source, man [ sic] appears a battlefield of drives and prohibitions equally de void of meaning and contingent” (2010: 55). Here we can see Beauvoir’s links to phenom ecological psychopathology very clearly. Looking for the causes of drives and symptoms without taking into account the way in which human beings make meaning of the world in general only leads to unfounded metaphysical assumptions that obscure individual lived experience.

Simone de Beauvoir Beauvoir is drawn to literature and autobiography precisely because they allow us to speak of a kind of experience that is out of reach to philosophy and science. Literature, often more so than philosophy, taps into aspects of living in the world that are far from conscious and yet belong to all of us as human beings. Her belief that fictional and autobi graphical narratives have the potential to reveal deep truths about human experience that other disciplines lack, makes her a detailed and innovative practitioner of existential phenomenology.

The Pathologizing of Women And the Elderly Despite the central role literature and autobiography play in her theoretical framework, the clearest access that we have into Beauvoir’s relationship to the development of phe nomenological psychopathology can be found in her two studies, The Second Sex and Old Age [La Vieillesse ]. Both of these works follow similar structures—the first half of the book explores various interpretive lenses employed in understanding the phenomena in question: in the case of women in the West, how they appear as the “Other” to the masc line subject through multiple theoretical and scientific perspectives (biology, psychoanaly sis, literature, historical materialism, history, etc.). In the case of the elderly, how they ap pear as outcasts through the perspectives of biology, ethnology, and history. In both books, Beauvoir shows how women and the elderly come to be pathologized as aberrant from the perspective of the dominant (p. 54) culture. This notion of finding the feminine or the elderly somehow abnormal may seem unusual, given that the former constitute half of the population, and the latter are the inevitable terminus for all human beings who sur Dive past middle age. Beauvoir’s reliance upon the self–other dynamic is helpful in com pretending this important move in her work.

Utilizing the phenomenological method of Hegel, but also some basic tenants of strum turalism, such as those found in Lvi-Strauss’s anthropology and Laban’s psychoanalysis, Beauvoir conceives of a fundamental self–other dynamic operative in identity formation and interpersonal relationships, both on the individual and social levels. As she explains, “the category of Other is as original as consciousness itself. The duality between Self and Other can be found in the most primitive societies, in the most ancient mythologies” ( Beauvoir 2010: 6). Instead of an originary belongingness (what Heidegger would refer to as Mitsein, or being-with) she instead emphasizes a more Hegelian frame work wherein “a fundamental hostility to any other consciousness is found in conscious Bess itself; the subject posits itself only in opposition; it asserts itself as the essential and sets up the other as inessential, as the object” (2010: 7). This critical claim comes to play a role in her later analysis of how the elderly—consciousness sets itself up as essential (one could say, as the primary meaning-bestowing subject) only by distinguishing itself from the other, to which it immediately puts itself in opposition. This opposition, as found in Hegel’s master–slave dialectic, is contentious and often results in the oppression of the other by the subject, at least until their shared humanity is recognized by both. Mutual recognition, when it is achieved out of this conflictual psychic structure, initiates a move Simone de Beauvoir away from inequality, psychic violence, and tyranny, and toward relationships of respect, generosity, and freedom.

Woman as the absolute Other serves a vital role in a patriarchal structure insofar as she becomes a repository for all that threatens human power. Thus, she becomes associated with birth and death (nature in general), and finitude and mortality—all of the aspects of human existence which give it meaning, but which also mark it as doomed to death and decay. In the second half of The Second Sex, titled “Lived Experience,” Beauvoir provides rich phenomenological descriptions of women’s lives in order to track the pervasiveness of the feminine as Other. The section opens with her most famous quote: “One is not born, but rather becomes, woman” (2010: 283). Throughout this volume, she emphasizes the societal structures that impose alterity (otherness) on women from the moment of birth until death. Beginning in childhood, girls and women must adopt and navigate their sta tus as the absolute Other to the masculine subject. Using literary accounts and sociology cal and psychological studies, Beauvoir often allows women to speak for themselves. Throughout the work she references analysts and psychologists such as Freud, Laban, Carl Jung, Jean Piaget, Karen Horny, Alfred Kinsey, Helene Deutsch, Alfred Adler, Albert Ellis, and Wilhelm Shekel, as well as writers such as Henry de Montherlant, Violette Educ, Leo Tolstoy, Richard Wright, Colette Audrey, Honoré de Balzac, and Henrik Ibsen, among many others. She provides multiple first-person accounts and case studies from women describing what it is like to undergo puberty, sexual initiation, maternity, aging, lesbianism, love, and work in order to give a multiperspectival account of the lived expert Fences of women as Other. Her choices range from the words of the women and girls un dergoing the experiences to writings by men about them in order to show the often tremendous gulf evident between what women say they experience and what men claim is the meaning of these experiences. In some ways, the collection of experiential descrip sons that suffuse the second half of The Second Sex continues decades later in her Mimi lar study on the alienation and pathologization of the elderly in Western culture.

Woman as the absolute Other serves a vital role in a patriarchal structure insofar as she becomes a repository for all that threatens human power. Thus, she becomes associated with birth and death (nature in general), and finitude and mortality—all of the aspects of human existence which give it meaning, but which also mark it as doomed to death and decay. In the second half of The Second Sex, titled “Lived Experience,” Beauvoir provides rich phenomenological descriptions of women’s lives in order to track the pervasiveness of the feminine as Other. The section opens with her most famous quote: “One is not born, but rather becomes, woman” (2010: 283). Throughout this volume, she emphasizes the societal structures that impose alterity (otherness) on women from the moment of birth until death. Beginning in childhood, girls and women must adopt and navigate their sta tus as the absolute Other to the masculine subject. Using literary accounts and sociology cal and psychological studies, Beauvoir often allows women to speak for themselves. Throughout the work she references analysts and psychologists such as Freud, Laban, Carl Jung, Jean Piaget, Karen Horny, Alfred Kinsey, Helene Deutsch, Alfred Adler, Albert Ellis, and Wilhelm Shekel, as well as writers such as Henry de Montherlant, Violette Educ, Leo Tolstoy, Richard Wright, Colette Audrey, Honoré de Balzac, and Henrik Ibsen, among many others. She provides multiple first-person accounts and case studies from women describing what it is like to undergo puberty, sexual initiation, maternity, aging, lesbianism, love, and work in order to give a multiperspectival account of the lived expert Fences of women as Other. Her choices range from the words of the women and girls un dergoing the experiences to writings by men about them in order to show the often tremendous gulf evident between what women say they experience and what men claim is the meaning of these experiences. In some ways, the collection of experiential descrip sons that suffuse the second half of The Second Sex continues decades later in her Mimi lar study on the alienation and pathologization of the elderly in Western culture.

(p. 55) Following the same phenomenological method employed in The Second Sex, Beau Coir titles the first half of Old Age, “Old Age Seen from Without,” and juxtaposes it with the second part, “The Being-in-the-World.” Again, she first focuses on theoretical, anthro pological, literary, and scientific interpretations of the elderly, followed by numerous per Tonal accounts of their lived experiences. As with women, the elderly undergo a social ex clusion by younger populations who define their own subjectivity through being not other, in this case, old. Beauvoir argues that the elderly individual suffers even more radically than woman because [he is] “to a far more radical extent than a woman, a mere object. She is necessary to society whereas he is of no worth at all. He cannot be used in barter, nor for reproductive purposes, nor as a producer: he is no longer anything but a bur den” ( Beauvoir 1996: 89). As a result, the elderly suffer even more extreme pathologiza son than women; because they are, in effect, “useless” in modern capitalist society; they are shunned, silenced, forgotten, and abused, resulting in lives filled with boredom, sad 3 Bess, and vulnerability. Such an observation is alarming because whereas women com pose half of the population, old age is something that befalls all human beings if they live long enough. In her phenomenological descriptions of the experiences of the aged, she Simone de Beauvoir notes how age comes upon us as a surprise, and from the judgment of others. The subject does not call herself old, those individuals and social structures around her do. Even more so than she does in The Second Sex, Beauvoir finds that the Bothering of the aged is never chosen by them (for there are no benefits in an advanced capitalist society to being old) but are forced upon the elderly by institutions and public opinion.

Beauvoir describes in detail what it feels like to age both from a philosophical and an au tobiographical perspective. In Old Age she notes that “For the aged person death is no longer a general, abstract fate: it is a personal event, an event that is near at hand” ( Beauvoir 1996: 440). Such an insight parallels the phenomenological descriptions of her own experiences of aging as depicted in one volume of her collected autobiogra phy, Hard Times. This work concludes with dark ruminations on the approaching horrors of old age and death. At only fifty-four years of age, Beauvoir laments the inevitable wan ing of passions, faculties, and social standing. Describing the lived experience of bodily decline and diminished intellectual passion, she observes: “My powers of revolt are dimmed now by the imminence of my end and the fatality of the deterioration that troop before it; but my joys have paled as well. Death is no longer a brutal event in the far dis Dance; it haunts my sleep. Awake I sense its shadow between the world and me: it has al ready begun” ( Beauvoir 1992: 378–379). The feminine is abject to the masculine insofar as it carries with it all that smacks of mortality, finitude, and natural growth and decay. The elderly are abject because of their temporal nearness to the absolute limit—death it self. Beauvoir’s work masterfully explores this relationship between aging and death from multiple angles thus giving voice to the voiceless and socially discarded.

Beauvoir’s approach, which involves listening to the marginalized and alienated groups of society, provides an invaluable perspective in the field of phenomenological psychopathol ogy. By allowing the socially pathologized and oppressed to speak for themselves, her writings continue to impact philosophical and psychological discussion in profound and il Ruminating ways. PAGE_BREAK This article discusses the philosophy of Max Schemer, a German philosopher known for his work in phenomenology, psychopathology, sociology, psychology, ethics, and philosophical anthropology. After a brief biographical sketch, the article focuses on Schemer’s philosophical trajectory, beginning with his undergraduate and postgraduate theses on some of the various realms of knowledge such as ethics, logic, psychology, and the transcendental approach of Emmanuel Kant, and how he was influenced by Edmund Husserl’s phenomenological philosophy. It then examines Schemer’s two important treats es on the phenomenology of emotion and value: Zur Phänomenologie und Theorize der Sympathiegefühl und vom Liege und Ass (On the Phenomenology and Theory of the Feeling of Sympathy and of Love and Hate ) and Der Formalism's in der Ethic und die ma teriale Wertethik (Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values ). Schemer’s works on philosophical anthropology, metaphysics, knowledge, and the realms of existence are also considered.

Keywords: Max Schemer, phenomenology, psychopathology, Edmund Husserl, emotion, value, ethics, knowledge, philosophical anthropology, metaphysics # Biographical Sketch MAX Schemer was born in Munich in 1874 and died in Frankfurt in 1928. He was only fifty-four. He lived through some of the most turbulent decades ever—the First World War, hyperinflation, revolutions of right and left. His personal life was also torrid— three marriages, a psychopathic son, dismissal from a university post for alleged sexual impropriety. His religious affiliations were unconventional, bordering on the bizarre—his mother was an orthodox Jew, his father Lutheran, he became a Catholic, then lapsed, then rejoined the faith, and latterly renounced all forms of theism in favor of an idiosyncratic “panentheism,” which holds that human beings are partners with some absolute Being Max Schemer with the purpose of producing a God-like entity. There are two biographies: Max Schemer and Max Schemer.

He was an intensely charismatic man, single-handedly responsible for converting the philosopher and martyr Edith Stein to Catholicism, captivating all manner of audiences in formal lectures or impromptu get-together, once even holding the attention of the Ger man High Command in a four-hour lecture on, of all subjects, pacifism. His contemporary philosophical colleagues revered him. Heidegger, Hartman, and Ortega y Asset, for ex ample, wrote movingly about him after his death. In short, he was primes inter pares.

His corpus of writings, fifteen volumes in The Collected Works, is wide-ranging (Schemer 1954–1997). He took an interest in all the nascent disciplines of his time—sociology, psy chology, psychopathology, and the new physics of relativity. He had a cosmopolitan sense of new directions in philosophy, championing Bergson and the American pragmatists. He was exquisitely attuned to the contemporary political scene: he lent support to the intel lectual justification of German war aims at the start of the First World War; he then of freed himself as a diplomat at the end of the war to heal the wounds; he was a friend of Walter Rathenau, the Wiemar foreign minister who was assassinated by Nazis in the early 1920s; he was the most high-ranking intellectual to warn of the evils of National Social ism long before Hitler came to power. All in all, he was what the Jewish call a Mensch, a “man for all seasons.”

He was extremely knowledgeable about psychopathology, too, and influenced one of the greatest psychopathologists of the twentieth century, Kurt Schneider, who had been his (p. 58) student. Schneider went on to produce breakthrough formula sons of depression and schizophrenia. Schemer him self wrote an article on compensation neurosis.

Philosophical Development His philosophical trajectory begins with his undergraduate and postgraduate theses on some of the various realms of knowledge available to the human being—logic, ethics, psy chology, and the transcendental approach of Kant. (This sets down markers for his lifelong preoccupation with epistemology.) In 1901 he met Husserl, whose phenomenological philosophy was to play a significant role in the field of non-Anglo-American intellectual debate for most of the twentieth century. Quite what happened in that meeting has never been satisfactorily established. Spiegelberg gives Schemer’s account of it: Schemer had al ready worked out what Husserl referred to as “categorical intuition”—the ability of the human mind to grasp categories or essences prior to any sensory appreciation of some matter. What matters, from a general overview of Schemer’s philoso phy, is that from that point forth Schemer saw in Husserl’s phenomenological philosophy something that provided the answer to what had been troubling him about psychology and philosophy for several years, namely that the human being could grasp the essence of something, which Husserl called “categorical intuition,” quite independently of their abili ty to pick up on the elements of that experience. Heretofore it had been axiomatic in psy Max Schemer chology and much of philosophy that achieving a meaningful view of anything was a stepwise process—sensation converted to perception converted to apperception, that is, meaning. Schemer and Husserl both realized that this was wrong. Husserl later back tracked on the very insight that had inspired Schemer, and reverted to a view of cognition whereby categories could only be understood if their elemental constituents had been previously perceived. To add to Schemer’s preoccupation with knowledge, in all its various forms, we can say that his appreciation that human beings can grasp the essence of things independently of any empirical calculation or abstraction was also a philosophical principle that he never renounced.

Phenomenology of Emotion and Value In 1913 came the publication of two of his most celebrated works. The first was Zur Phänomenologie und Theorize der Sympathiegefühl und vom Liege und Ass (On the Phe nomenology and Theory of the Feeling of Sympathy and of Love and Hate ). This ran through five editions and was retitled Ween und Foremen der Sympathize (The Nature of Sympathy ) from the second edition Inwards. The second treatise— Der Formalism's in der Ethic und die material Wertethik (Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Val ues ) —was published in Husserl’s journal of phenomenology, a second part being published in the same journal in 1916.

We can discuss both together as they jointly constitute the bulk of Schemer’s phenomenal ogy of emotion and value. He planned a comprehensive, if not exhaustive, treatment of (p. 59) the entire area, and there are additional articles in his Collected Works on shame, and on orzo amoris (the order of the heart). The out standing notion developed in the first book is an answer to the “question of our knoll edge of other minds.” We know these exist, Schemer says, not by logical analogy from our knowledge of ourselves and not by means of empathy, that is, transferring something of ourselves into the other, but by sympathy, direct knowledge of what is there. In the sec ond treatise he elaborates on what it is that is grasped in such a task, how it is done, and how the entire moral and emotional make-up of a human being originates in a similar way through direct knowledge of a hierarchical order of objective values. The overall theme in both books is the postulation of a special faculty in human beings, some of which is shared with other animals, for “perceiving” an entire realm of values and discriminating between levels of these, a faculty moreover which is independent of cognition and whose structural variations in the population makes for a different moral tenor in different peo ple, and whose “valueception,” as he calls it, is registered by a correlative hierarchy of emotion. We can now add to our developing picture of Schemer’s philosophy his deli Cation of an entire realm of emotional life in humans, with its own laws, its own perceptu al apparatus, and its consequences for human nature itself.

Max Schemer # Knowledge and the Realms of Existence Some commentators refer to three phases in Schemer’s philosophical development. The works on emotion and value just discussed are deemed part of the first phase. A second phase is considered to be the books and book-length articles he brought out in the early and mid-1920s. This was an immensely prolific phase, but two books stand out, Vom Ewigen im Mensches (On the Eternal in Man ) published in 1921, and Die Wissensformen und die Gesellschaft (Forms of Knowledge and Society ) from 1926. Both deal with knowledge but in a wider and more profound framework than hitherto. The first covers philosophical and religious knowledge, the second mainly practical knowledge. Both, however, do something barely touched on before, and that is to trace knowledge back to its origin, to ask, in brief, what is knowledge?

I can only give a taste of the range and depth of his answers. He was writing now like a man possessed. He had a premonition of his approaching death. His wife recalled him philosophizing from the moment he woke up, scribbling things down on menus and train tickets; Heidegger (1984 ) writes of “day-and-night-long conversations with him” and of a man driven to “powerlessness and despair” in his search for answers.

Knowledge, as he argues, “is a relationship between entities... in which one entity ac quires part of the nature of another entity without in any way altering the nature of this second entity. The ‘known’ becomes part of he or she who knows” ( Schemer 1926: 247). Knowing something therefore assumes there is something there to be known, and any en sty is potentially knowable. This means, for instance, that because at least some human beings possess knowledge about a religious entity—God—then God must exist for that knowledge to have been conveyed to human beings, however few. Knowledge, however, differs radically according to the realm in which the entity exists, and the way some ens ty exists differs across such realms. According to Schemer there are about nine realms of fundamentally different sorts—for example, absolute, external world, internal world, (p. 60) environment. Therefore the manner in which God exists—in the absolute realm—is not the same as the way things exist in the external world, and neither is the knowledge form appropriate to participating in the nature of God—faith—the same as the knowledge form which allows participation in things in the external world—perception. Over time, chiefly in early childhood, the continual participation of the knower in the objects falling within the jurisdiction of their correlative knowledge Woulds the way the knower treats subsequent objects of the same kind, even distorting them. “How you are loved is how you will love,” he writes, which means that if you are hated and not loved as a child you will grow up a hateful person, and the same goes for other realms. He calls this process whereby an object influences subjective appraisal, “functionalisation.” Finally, though we could pick out numerous other pearls, what starts the knowledge process going is “love.” Why should anyone “stretch out,” he writes, to another being and want to know it in the first place anyway? The answer is “love”: this was already identified by Plato as the hall mark of the spur to philosophical knowledge, and it is inherent in all new sorts of knoll edge which are pursued by amateurs (lovers) before professionals take over. To continue our cumulative summary of Schemer’s philosophy we can now say that Max Schemer he was developing a middle road between idealism and realism, where there was indeed “not nothing” out there but only through our various facilities of knowledge could this be objectified and made actual.

Anthropology and Metaphysics The last few years of his life constitute a third phase in his philosophy when he turned more and more to anthropology and metaphysics. Much of his writings from this period were published posthumously, having been collated and saved for posterity by his third wife through all the years of the Nazi regime when he was a proscribed person. Again we are spoil for choice, but we can single out Die Stellung des Mensches im Cosmos (The Human Place in the Cosmos ), published in 1927, as a concise summary of his philosophical anthropology, and volumes 10 to 15 of his Collected Works, of which I have translated several essays from volumes 11 and 12 under the title The Constitution of the Human Being, as the draft for a book on metaphysics that he never lived to complete. My own favorite is the long treatise— Idealism's—Realism's (Idealism and Realism )—partly translated in 1973.

His philosophical anthropology is an attempt to answer the question, “What is the human being and what is his place in being?” His answer is that the human being shares much with the higher non-human animals—for example, intelligence, a certain emotional Leper Loire—but differs from such animals in possessing Deist (spirit and reason) which allows it to stand back and criticize and objectivize the very properties that it does share with oth er animals. The human is unique in the cosmos, uniquely separate from other animals in having Deist and uniquely separate from God in being an animal. Its achievements and woes all stem from this fact.

As for his metaphysics this is truly unique vis-à-vis any other philosopher. His notion of what metaphysics is—in short, the superordinate of all knowledge and that includes the logy, science, and art—and his metaphysical method—essentially thought experiments (p. 61) akin to Husserl’s phenomenological reduction but more radical and in both dire sons, imagining a human being without its animality and imagining it without its spiritual and rational component—are magnificent. We can finish perhaps with a few quotes from his Idealism's—Realism's: Reality is transintelligible for every possible knowing mind. Only the what of the being, not the being of the what is intelligible.

(Schemer 1973c: 312)

Reality is the resistance to our continually active, spontaneous, but at the same time completely involuntary impulsive life.

(Schemer 1973c: 325)

Max Schemer Knowledge first becomes conscious knowledge [ Bewusstsein ], that is comes out of its original ecstatic form of simply “having” things, in which there is no knowledge of the having of that through which and in which it is had, when the act of being thrown back on the self, probably only possible for men, comes into play.

(Schemer 1973c: 294)

Bibliography Cutting J., Mouratidou M., Fuchs T., and Owen G.. “Max Schemer’s Influence on Kurt Schneider.” History of Psychiatry 31: 1–9. Dunlap F.. Thinkers of our Time: Schemer. London: The Claridge Press. Rings M. S.. Max Schemer: A Concise Introduction into the World of a Great Thinker. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press. Heidegger M.. The Metaphysical Foundations of Logic, trans. M. Ham. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Nader W.. Max Schemer. Bonn: Bouvier Verlag. Schemer M.. Die Wissensformen und die Gesellschaft. Leipzig: Der Nee-Deist Ver lag. Schemer M.. Gesammelte Were, Band 1–15. Bonn: Bouvier Verlag. Schemer M.. On the Eternal in Man, trans. B. Nobel. Camden: Arson Books. Schemer M. (1973a) “Oreo amoris”. In Max Schemer: Selected Philosophical Essays, trans. D. R. Lachterman, pp 98–135. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schemer M. (1973b). Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values, trans. M. S. Rings and R. L. Funk. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schemer M. (1973c). “Idealism and Realism”. In Max Schemer: Selected Philosophy cal Essays, trans. D. R Lachterman, pp. 288–356. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schemer M. “The Psychology of So-Called Compensation Hysteria and the Real Bat tle against Illness”, trans. E. Vacek. Journal of Phenomenological Psychology 15: 125–143. Schemer M. “Shame and Feelings of Modesty”. In Max Schemer, Person and Self-Value, Three Essays, trans. M. S. Rings, pp. 1–85. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff. Schemer M. (2008a). The Nature of Sympathy, trans. P. Heath. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. (Schemer 1973c: 294)

Bibliography Cutting J., Mouratidou M., Fuchs T., and Owen G.. “Max Schemer’s Influence on Kurt Schneider.” History of Psychiatry 31: 1–9. Dunlap F.. Thinkers of our Time: Schemer. London: The Claridge Press. Rings M. S.. Max Schemer: A Concise Introduction into the World of a Great Thinker. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press. Heidegger M.. The Metaphysical Foundations of Logic, trans. M. Ham. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Nader W.. Max Schemer. Bonn: Bouvier Verlag. Schemer M.. Die Wissensformen und die Gesellschaft. Leipzig: Der Nee-Deist Ver lag. Schemer M.. Gesammelte Were, Band 1–15. Bonn: Bouvier Verlag. Schemer M.. On the Eternal in Man, trans. B. Nobel. Camden: Arson Books. Schemer M. (1973a) “Oreo amoris”. In Max Schemer: Selected Philosophical Essays, trans. D. R. Lachterman, pp 98–135. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schemer M. (1973b). Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values, trans. M. S. Rings and R. L. Funk. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schemer M. (1973c). “Idealism and Realism”. In Max Schemer: Selected Philosophy cal Essays, trans. D. R Lachterman, pp. 288–356. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schemer M. “The Psychology of So-Called Compensation Hysteria and the Real Bat tle against Illness”, trans. E. Vacek. Journal of Phenomenological Psychology 15: 125–143. Schemer M. “Shame and Feelings of Modesty”. In Max Schemer, Person and Self-Value, Three Essays, trans. M. S. Rings, pp. 1–85. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff. Schemer M. (2008a). The Nature of Sympathy, trans. P. Heath. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.

Max Schemer Schemer M. (2008b). The Constitution of the Human Being, trans. J. Cutting. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press. Schemer M.. The Human Place in the Cosmos, trans. M. S. Rings. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

(p. 62) Schneider K.. Psychischer Refund und Psychiatrische Diagnose. Leipzig: George Theme. Schneider K.. “The Stratification of Emotional Life and the Structure of Depressive States”. In M. R. Brooke, R. Garland, G. Owen, and A. Stringaris (eating disorders.), The Maud sly Reader of Phenomenological Psychiatry, pp 203–214. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer City Press. Spiegelberg H.. The Phenomenological Movement. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Staude, J. R.. Max Schemer. New York: The Free Press.

John Cutting Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London (p. 62) Schneider K.. Psychischer Refund und Psychiatrische Diagnose. Leipzig: George Theme. Schneider K.. “The Stratification of Emotional Life and the Structure of Depressive States”. In M. R. Brooke, R. Garland, G. Owen, and A. Stringaris (eating disorders.), The Maud sly Reader of Phenomenological Psychiatry, pp 203–214. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer City Press. Spiegelberg H.. The Phenomenological Movement. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Staude, J. R.. Max Schemer. New York: The Free Press.

John Cutting Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London Hans-Reorg Gadamer Hans-Reorg Gadamer Andrzej Wiercinski The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Sep 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Hermeneutics as the art of understanding concerns the totality of being a human being in the world. By thematizing health in its unstable equilibrium, Gadamer’s phenomenology cal hermeneutics of medicine offers an alternative to the predominantly scientific modes of understanding health and illness. Gadamer advocates embracing the truth of lived ex perience without silencing what seems to be incomprehensible, unpredictable, and ibex pliable. Hermeneutics promotes an understanding of the art of healing, which over comes the overwhelming tendency in contemporary medicine to interpret phenomenology cal descriptions of the human condition into the language of clinical and pathophysiologi cal processes that require pharmacological intervention. The hermeneutic task of the doc tor is to learn together with the patient about our self-understanding by thinking about and dealing with the medical condition. Clinical medicine can be practiced as hermeneu tics by addressing the phenomena of health and illness as the first-person human expert Once that calls for understanding.

Keywords: Gadamer, phenomenology, hermeneutics, health, illness, interpretation, medicine, psychopathology # Introduction HERMENEUTICS as the art of understanding does not deal only with interpretation of texts but concerns the totality of being a human being-in-the-world. Its task is to con tribute to the understanding of human experience, particularly by helping to unveil mean Dings that are hidden in the different aspects of the human realities. In the foreword to the Second Edition of his Truth and Method, Gadamer, a hermeneutic philosopher par excel Fence, explains that the way hermeneutics breaks with the instrumental mind is a truly scientific commitment to the integrity of all understanding, which is, following Heidegger, not merely one of the human faculties, but a mode of being a human being. Thus, to be a human being means to live an interpretive existence: existential hermeneutica. Gadamer’s hermeneutic concern is philosophical: “Not what we do or what we ought to do, but what happens to us over and above our wanting and doing” ( Gadamer 2006: xxvi). Since all un Hans-Reorg Gadamer derstanding is interpretation, hermeneutics places in the very center of the event of un derstanding what happens to us when we understand. Not the conditions of possibility of knowledge, not the methods of acquiring certain knowledge, but the transformation of the subject who interprets is the core of the hermeneutic task as the event of truth and the event of sense. The meaning of what wants to be understood is not simply there; it shows itself as different from a thing and at the same time as something indistinguish able. This aesthetic non-differentiation in the process of a total mediation can be per caved as a happening indifference (Gadamer 2006: 110–119). Gadamer’s notion of aes thetic non-differentiation is fundamental for understanding how the original life signify Dance can be transformed into the reflected experience. Its indispensability for the inter pretation of a personal condition in a conversation with the other highlights the imper ant consequence of understanding Gadamer’s phenomenological hermeneutics not as the immanence of consciousness, not even disclosedness of Casein, but as the truth of language.

(p. 64) Intellectual Biography Hans-Reorg Gadamer, born in 1900 in Marburg, inaugurated the century of hermeneutics as a new discourse not only in philosophy and the humanities but across the disciplines. Since the essence of tradition is to exist in the medium of language that expresses itself like a Thou, Gadamer’s phenomenological hermeneutics 1 is lingually oriented. Language as conversation is a medium through which the world dis closes itself to human Casein. Gadamer places the idea of conversation at the very center of hermeneutics, reformulating the old tradition of a dialectics of question and answer through the perspective of the history of its effects. By prioritizing the role of converse son in the event of understanding, he contributes to the culture of dialogue. In continua son with Heidegger’s Being and Time, Gadamer’s opus magnum on temporality and his toxicity of human understanding, Truth and Method, uncovers the phenomenon of understanding. Gadamer’s main concern is not to elaborate on the rules of interpretation but to address the question of what happens when we understand. Each time we under stand, “we understand in a different way, if we understand at all ” (Gadamer 2006: 296). Gadamer’s notion of historically effected consciousness as a stream in which we actively participate when we understand helps to recognize tradition as the source of meaning that is relevant for us and underlines the centrality of the subject matter in the interpret Dive process. We are the tradition that we want to understand as human beings who are historical, lingual, and finite beings: “To be historically means that knowledge of oneself can never be complete” ( Gadamer 2006: 301). Since understanding happens within Lori Cons that are permeable and open to other horizons, “understanding is always the fusion of these horizons supposedly existing by themselves” ( Gadamer 2006: 305). The fusion of horizons not only respects the difference but puts the interpreter in the in-between of fa miliarity and strangeness. By highlighting the role of prejudices in the process of under standing, Gadamer questions the wish of achieving total transparency regarding the con Editions of understanding.

Hans-Reorg Gadamer Critical engagement with Jürgen Habermas, Jacques Derrida, and Paul Ricoeur, inspired Gadamer to rethink the scope of philosophical hermeneutics by accentuating the in-be tween of tradition and critique. Gadamer’s interest in Platonic dialectic as the art of car Dying on a conversation allowed for his passionate engagement with art, medicine, and social sciences, and highlighted the relevance of hermeneutics for society and social life. His essays in The Enigma of Health critically engage with the prevailing view of medical practice in an age of science and create space for medicine as the art of healing. Gadamer not only cautions against a too simplistic pathologization of the human condition but invites us to embrace difficult aspects of human behavior in the gesture of hermeneutic hospitality.

As one of the most famous students of Heidegger and the inheritor of his thinking, Gadamer became internationally famous after his retirement from the University of Hei delberg, where he was Jasper’s successor for almost two decades. His long and (p. 65) accomplished life as a hermeneutic philosopher extends beyond his death in 2002 and continues to inspire thinkers to participate in the event of understanding in and through which the world opens itself to us.

Health as Unstable Equilibrium: A Hermeneu # tic Approach to Medical Practice With Karl Jasper’s pioneering 1913 book General Psychopathology, phenomenological description of the patient’s life experience became crucial for psychiatric assessment aim ing at scientific precision, attempting to free itself from all theoretical and habitual pre suppositions. Such a static understanding in psychopathology was supposed to allow for the unprejudiced access to mental phenomena by opposing descriptive to explanatory psychopathology. Though Gadamer was certainly indebted to Jasper, for whom every un derstanding is interpretation, he claims that there is no presuppositionless access to what wants to be understood. In fact, the task of understanding is to disclose how prejudices and pre-judgments condition our understanding. The self is not a disengaged individual but exists in a concrete sociocultural surrounding. As Gadamer argues: Long before we understand ourselves through the process of self-examination, we understand ourselves in a self-evident way in the family, society, and state in which we live. The focus of subjectivity is a distorting mirror. The self-awareness of the individual is only a flickering in the closed circuits of historical life. That is why the prejudices of the individual, far more than his judgments, constitute the history cal reality of his being.

(Gadamer 2006: 278)

Gadamer’s major contribution to psychopathology lies not in offering ground-breaking discoveries about the how of concrete medical diagnosis and treatments, but in emphasis ing the essential importance of understanding what it means to be a human being-in-the- Hans-Reorg Gadamer world. This understanding calls for readiness and openness to learning, predominantly about ourselves, in the challenging condition, which we call illness. The role of medical professionals is not to validate their scientific understanding while engaging the patient, but to learn together with the patient about our self-understanding by thinking about and dealing with the medical condition. The real necessity of facing our life while being ill dri ves doctors and patients toward the task of thinking. This existential inescapability dis closes to us something essential about our self-understanding.

Gadamerian phenomenological hermeneutics of medicine thematizes health in its unsta ble equilibrium (Svenaeus 2001: 74, 80). Illness is not a simple lack of health that needs to be restored but demonstrates itself in different forms far beyond the experience of sickness. The task of medicine as the art of healing is to contribute to living this unstable equilibrium in the totality of human experience of being-in-the-world. Following Plato’s understanding of disturbed equilibrium, Gadamer stresses that the body can heal only if the care of the soul is not overlooked (Plato 1995: 270b ff.). The equilibrium means that the successful care of the human being depends on various activities always in the right measure and at the right time. (p. 66) The right measure, what is appropriate or fitting, is an interior measure of a human being, which takes into account a totality of lived expert Once. This right measure is not a question of a quantitative measuring, but of a qualitive self-reflexive lived experience: Modern science has come to regard the results of [its] measuring procedures as the real facts which it must seek to order and collect. But the data provided in this way only reflect conventionally established criteria brought to the phenomena from without. They are always our own criteria that we impose on the thing we wish to measure. The living body and life are things that cannot simply be mea Cured.

(Gadamer 1996: 32)

Essential for Gadamer is to argue that the art of healing which tends to care about Nestor ing the hidden and unstable equilibrium is a qualitative deliberation on the issue in ques son of the doctor together with the patient rather than a quantitative calculation of con temporary medicine.

A hermeneutic approach to medical practice offers a richer understanding of health and illness with reference to the human being’s mode of being-in-the-world rather than to a particular medical disorder that can be scientifically defined and professionally treated. In The Enigma of Health, Gadamer emphasizes illness as the fundamental rupture in hu man beings’ mode of being, which prompts the thematization of health: “Health is not a state that one introspectively feels in oneself;” it is rather “the rhythm of life” ( Gadamer 1996: 113–114). Gadamer offers a hermeneutic alternative to the predominantly scientific modes of understanding health and illness by embracing the truth of lived experience in its totality without silencing what seems to be incomprehensible, unpredictable, and ibex pliable. Critically assessing the potential of contemporary medicine in eliminating the disruptive consequences illness has on the life world of the ill person, Gadamer calls for a Hans-Reorg Gadamer close introspection into uniquely personal life-history. The positivistic notion of object tivism reduces human experience to aspects, which can be formally investigated by in strumental rationality. By problematizing instrumental notions of rationality and the psi tivistic notion of objectivism, Gadamer warns against monolithic biological explanations of an observable pathology that fits into diagnostic categories (Gadamer 1996: 42). In stead, Gadamer advocates listening to the life-story of the patient to decipher together with the patient the meaning of the patient’s existential experience without expurgating uncertainty, ambiguity, and complexity of the human condition. Gadamer calls for being thoughtful of the tension between understanding of health as an existential and individual experience of being a human being and disease as the manifestation of a disturbance of a personal condition.

What seems to be crucial in medical practice is not so much specific knowledge content, but dialectical understanding as an ability to act wisely in a particular situation. For Gadamer, hermeneutics is the art of conversation, a path of experiencing, which is open to the dialogical engagement with the other. This path of experiencing, which recognizes the possibility of superiority of the partner, who might be right, is the only way we can live our life in a constant search for the truth about ourselves. When Gadamer speaks about the openness to the conversation as the only kind of integrity of the philosopher, we can extend it to the existential principle of every human being. Hence, the importance of the conversation in medical practice, when reaching an understanding of the issue in question happens as a fusion of horizons of patient and doctor. Describing the fusion of horizons, Gadamer (p. 67) writes: “We can now see that this is what takes place in cover Cation, in which something is expressed that is not only mine or my author’s, but com mon” ( Gadamer 2006: 390).

Understanding Illness: The Task of Interpret # son Understanding psychopathological conditions requires being situated between descrip son and interpretation in doctors and patients alike. Phenomenological hermeneutics challenges core assumptions in medicine by readdressing the understanding of the hu man being as the self, which grows as thrown into the world and is shaped by the socio historical conditions (Gadamer 1996: 81). The art of healing puts at the very center an in dividual life project and the medical professionals search together with the patient for the modes of care that can assist the patients with living their life. Such an art as a care pram ice favors the persons in their existence instead of being predominantly concerned with the physiological manifestations of a disease.

Gadamer’s phenomenological hermeneutics of medicine assigns the ontological primacy to health as a state of equilibrium and understands illness as a lack of equilibrium. Even a diseased person experiences some equilibrium (Wiercinski 2013: 19–28). Thus, illness can be defined only in a negative sense as the lack of equilibrium which needs to be restored while facing the unpredictability of the human condition. The relationship between Hans-Reorg Gadamer hermeneutic insight and clinical discourse proves to be medically promising, especially while facing the increasing medicalization and pathologization of the human condition. Hermeneutics helps to promote an understanding of the art of healing, which overcomes the tendency in contemporary medicine to interpret phenomenological descriptions of the human condition into the language of clinical and pathophysiological processes that call for pharmacological intervention. Clinical medicine can be practiced as hermeneutics by addressing the phenomena of health and illness as the first-person human experience which calls for understanding. The healing process is a transformation of the relationship of a human being’s being-in-the-world to one’s embodied lived experience. Understanding a disease presents us with an almost incomprehensible challenge of facing something that shows itself as outrageously different and obscure and yet as something that wants to be understood. Gadamer’s phenomenological hermeneutics accentuates the imper Dance of disclosure of what was uncovered in the understanding of the phenomenon in question: As a phenomenon of lived experience insight into one’s own illness is clearly not simply insight in the sense of knowledge of a true state of affairs, but rather, like all insight, it is something which is acquired with great difficulty and by overcome ing significant resistance. We know the important role which concealment of the awareness of ill-health plays in certain human illnesses and, above all, what an im portent role this concealment can play in the lived existence of a person.

(Gadamer 1996: 52)

The phenomenon of illness needs to be interpreted within the meaning structures of hu man experience. To unveil meanings hidden in illness, it is essential to address the impact illness has on human life. The singularity of this experience calls for prudent assessment of the (p. 68) experience of illness and serves as a warning against premature formalize son of the effects illness can have on human life, both from the scientific objectivized medical perspective and from the particular experience of the affected person: “Medicine is the only science which, ultimately, does not make or produce anything. Rather, it is one which must participate in the wonderful capacity of life to renew itself, to set itself aright” ( Gadamer 1996: 89).

Instead of reducing medicine to observing and fixing problems identified as pathology, phenomenological hermeneutics calls for paying attention to the world of the patient by listening to the patient’s experience. In order to make it happen, the notion of the patient needs to be transformed from a dysfunctional object in need of medical treatment into an irreplaceable existence, which unfolds while living one’s life. The individuality of being-inthe-world cannot be reduced to a common experience of being a human being. This Taus es obvious difficulties for medicine, since it allows a human being to experience the world in one’s own way and to make sense of this personal experience. Gadamer stresses the unavoidability of suffering in a process of self-education. Suffering cannot be reduced to a biological condition that can be fixed with medical technology (Gadamer 1996: 21). Stressing the delicate borderline between suffering as a mode of being a human being-in- Hans-Reorg Gadamer the-world and pathological disorder, prompts medicine to be aware of premature medical ization of the human condition.

Gadamer’s Phenomenological Hermeneutics of # Medicine An important but also a difficult task of medical practice is not to see a singular medical problem but to engage critically and constructively the totality of lived experience in an exchange between patient and doctor. The overemphasis of the relevance of medical tech nology for diagnosis and treatment of the patient reduces illness to a case of physiology cal imbalance and leads undoubtedly to the growing estrangement of the doctor and the patient. Even for the treating doctor, it often poses a significant challenge of trusting the machinery rather than one’s own judgment. Gadamer stresses the inescapable personal responsibility of the doctor and also of the patient, who needs to respond to her or his own condition in a unique way. Hence, the importance of the doctor–patient conversation in all stages of their engagement (Gadamer 1996: 128).

Gadamer’s phenomenological hermeneutics of medicine stresses the priority of the ques son. It is an experience of asking questions, while we need to clarify our understanding of ourselves, particularly when the health equilibrium is broken. We ask questions because we know that we do not know what is happening to us. In a conversation, we wish to ar rive at understanding of ourselves by engaging the other and by searching for under standing with the other (Gadamer 2006: 385). A medical encounter discloses not only a possible understanding of a dis-ease, but different ways of seeing the world, which is the result of the fusion of the horizons of the doctor and the patient mediated by the use of language and tradition. This encounter, in which neither participants of the conversation knows what will “come out” of it, leads not only to an enlargement of understanding of the medical condition, but to the enlarged self of the doctor and the patient alike.

(p. 69) Medicine, for Gadamer, is “withdrawing itself and helping to set the other person free” (Gadamer 1996: 43). This means that the successful medical treatment cannot be the result of the competence of health professionals but must include the personal en gagement of the patient in understanding her or his own condition and in a dynamic in volvement in acting toward recovery. Gadamer emphasizes that it is important to see two sets of judgments, one which leads to diagnosis that needs to be done by negotiating and the other which leads to treatment. Here, it is important to distinguish between the un derstanding of the medical condition from the understanding of the person, which is es sentially needed to create a connection with the patient. This connection is not only need ed as the bonus of the interpersonal interaction between the doctor and the patient but is essential for the healing process. It is a question of working together on the common task (Gadamer 1996: 38). Working toward a shared understanding happens as the fusion of horizons: Understanding in the medical context comes into being as the effect of interact son between the doctor and the patient.

Hans-Reorg Gadamer In a conversation between the doctor and the patient it is crucial to be open and to listen to each other in order to understand. However, what happens very often is rather the op polite: “Instead of learning to look for illness in the eyes of the patient or to listen for it in the patient’s voice, [the doctor] tries to read off the data provided by technologically so phisticated measuring instruments” ( Gadamer 1996: 98). This listening to each other has a powerful transformative effect. The transformation of the person means that one be comes another person and “that what existed previously exists no longer” ( Gadamer 2006: 111).

In his phenomenological hermeneutics of medicine, Gadamer reminds us that as human beings we inhabit a shared world. This means that to be a human being is to be an ethical being. A medical encounter is a meeting of human beings who bear responsibility for each other. It is exactly the reciprocity of responsibility, which revolutionizes the under standing of medical practice. The doctor and the patient are mutually responsible for each other. If, for Gadamer, the practice of hermeneutics means the participation in an ongoing dialogue with others, the art of healing can be practiced only in a dialogical Lori zon. An encounter between doctor and patient is in its essence a dialogical encounter and it happens as thinking in action. The active role of the doctor and the patient is essential to understanding of the disease and necessary for treatment.

Gadamer highlights the importance of hermeneutic imagination, which allows one to un derstand and to deal with the intricacies of the human condition (Gadamer 2006: 555, 572). This calls for attention to what it means to be a human being and thus to what counts and matters for an individual in a way which is not only unique for each person, but to a large extent also incommunicable. Gadamer emphasizes the importance of in sight while dealing with illness, and particularly with mental illness, when a patient is of ten unable to experience hero himself as ill. The ambiguity implicit in the understand ing of mental health highlights the tension in human existence. An increasingly biological interpretation of mental illness and medicalization of a mental condition that can be treat ed with a particular drug reduces medicine to measurable variables. Therefore, Gadamer’s hermeneutics of medicine calls for overcoming the reduction of health sci Fences to physiopathology and for inclusive care of human beings in their being-in-theworld (Gadamer 1996: 77). Gadamer warns against giving up responsibility for one’s own well-being, particularly with reference to mental disorders, and depending too heavily on decision-making by the doctor. He welcomes the rapid advancements of psychoanalysis without overlooking its substantial problems (Wiercinski 2014: 311–313).

(p. 70) For Gadamer, mental illness is characterized by not feeling at home ( unheimlich ) in the world. His understanding calls for moving beyond a scientific explanation of mental illness in terms of neurobiological processes without neglecting the contribution of specif ic medical sciences: In mental illness the twofold manner of “being at home” which is constitutive of human life, being at home in the world and being at home with oneself, is no longer successfully accomplished. Mental illness does not so much involve the loss Hans-Reorg Gadamer of specific abilities as the failure to meet a challenge with which we are all perm Gently confronted, that is of sustaining the equilibrium between our animalitas and that in which we identify our vocation as human beings. When suffering from men tal illness our condition does not simply fall into an animal-vegetative state; the deforming loss of equilibrium is rather something which peculiarly affects the mind.

(Gadamer 1996: 60)

If mental health is perceived as a state of equilibrium, mental illness is a rupture of this equilibrium caused by the inability of dealing with the possibilities surrounding us, and by our understanding of these possibilities (Gadamer 1996: 58).

Conclusion The fundamental task of being a human being is self-understanding in the world, in which the self is thrown into the variety of languages that cannot be reduced to one language. To understand oneself in the world means understanding the self and the other. To under stand the other, one needs to listen to the other with a strong conviction that the other might be right. To help a human being find itself at home in this complex world can be seen as a genuine goal of a phenomenological hermeneutics of medicine and, in fact, medicine itself. The task of medicine is to help uncover the phenomenon of being a hu man being in the adequacy of one’s own vocation without a premature pressure to solve all the difficult problems that the self experiences. If medicine wishes to be an art of heal ing, it must be a dialogical science, an art of healing that assists in finding one’s own way to live one’s life.

Gadamer problematizes the understanding of the nature of the professional medical pram ice. Participating in the act of healing is, in itself, a hermeneutic enterprise. The under standing of the doctor is happening in the medical encounter while engaging the medical problem and the patient. It discloses not only the matter to be understood but, predomi nantly, who the self is as a person who is involved.

Gadamer’s contribution to psychopathology is particularly important at the level of in escapable interpretation of the primordial lived experience of the human being as a finite, lingual, temporal, and historical agent in a concrete life-world ( Lebenswelt ). Interpreting the manifestation of human suffering in the world requires, from both the patient and the doctor, an attentiveness to the lived experience and a willingness to search together for an understanding and its creative productivity for the patient. Suffering discloses some thing essential about our way of being-in-the-world and cannot be reduced to a medical problem in need of being controlled or overcome. It can help to uncover what it means to be a human being. This uncovering is happening as a hermeneutic logic of question and answer and leads (p. 71) to an understanding. This is not merely a reconstruction (retro Hans-Reorg Gadamer Auction) of meaning, but a truly creative and productive engagement in which we re-cog Size what has been cognized in that which needs to be understood.

Gadamer’s hermeneutic contribution to psychopathology reminds us that no one method logical approach to understanding human psyche could possibly claim dominance. Psy chopathology is an interdisciplinary field and as such needs to be open to the infinite task of interpretation. Medicine in the scientific age is not able to deal with the enigma of health, which, by its illusive and enigmatic nature cannot be measured. Understanding health as a condition of an engaged being-in-the world with others does not follow the traditional health–illness dichotomy but calls for re-humanization of medicine in its selfunderstanding beyond scientifically determined processes of rationalization, automatize son, and specialization.

Wiercinski A.. “Hermeneutics of Medicine: The Phonetic Dimension of Medical Ethics.” In A. Bobko (ed.), Etyka wobec współczesnych wyzwań: Wybrane aspekty [Ethics Facing Contemporary Challenges: Selected Aspects], pp. 19–28. Rzeszów: Uniwersytet Rzeszowski.

Wiercinski A.. “Questioning the Limits of Interpretation: The Intrinsic Challenges to Hermeneutics and Psychoanalysis.” In H. Lang, P. Dybel, and G. Bagel (eating disorders.), Grenzen der Interpretation in Hermeneutik und Psychoanalyze, pp. 295–315. Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann.

Notes:

1 ( ) Linguality ( Sprachlichkeit ) is the essential trait of Gadamerian hermeneutics, empha sizing the lingual (and not linguistic) character of human understanding. I prefer the translation “linguality/lingual” over “linguisticity/linguistic,” since the latter translation Hans-Reorg Gadamer might erroneously suggest a relationship to the field of linguistics ( Linguistic/Sprachwis senschaft ).

Andrzej Wiercinski Department of Education, University of Warsaw Hans-Reorg Gadamer might erroneously suggest a relationship to the field of linguistics ( Linguistic/Sprachwis senschaft ).

Andrzej Wiercinski Department of Education, University of Warsaw Paul Ricoeur # Paul Ricoeur René Rosfort The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Paul Ricoeur belongs to the first generation of French phenomenology, and his principal contribution to the phenomenological tradition is to be found in his development of a hermeneutical phenomenology. Ricoeur’s work spans more than half a century and is shaped by his conviction that philosophy is first and foremost to create a dialogue be tween various fields of knowledge. He considers phenomenology a necessary, but not suf ficient theory to make sense of human life. In fact, Ricoeur’s turn to hermeneutics in the beginning of his career is an attempt to make sense of the complexity of human identity. We experience ourselves are autonomous creatures, and yet we constantly find ourselves restricted by various kinds of heteronomous factors (e.g. biological, cultural, ethical). This dialectics of autonomy and passivity constitutive of human identity is at the core of Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenology, and in particular of his influential theory of nar Dative identity.

Keywords: phenomenology, hermeneutics, hermeneutical phenomenology, dialectics, autonomy, passivity, narra Dive identity, dialogue # Philosophical Development PAUL Ricoeur was a protagonist of the first generation of French phenom nology. As is the case with his phenomenological contemporaries in France, his approach to Husserlian and Heideggerian phenomenology is characterized by a productive comb nation of appropriation and critical development. Ricoeur’s work extends over more than half a century and deals with a remarkable variety of themes and interlocutors that is sin gulag among the major phenomenologists of the twentieth century. He is perhaps the most comprehensive thinker in the phenomenological tradition. His authorship includes careful engagements with major cultural phenomena of the twentieth century such as psychoanalysis, existentialism, hermeneutics, structuralism, poststructuralism, narrative theory, and even neuroscience. Moreover, throughout his long career he published nu Serous essays on the questions of politics and institutions of his day. Ricoeur was a pram Paul Ricoeur icing Christian and, while maintaining strict separation between his philosophical and theological work, he contributed with books and a vast amount of articles on religion and in particular the Christian tradition, which he considered to be one of the principal sources of Western philosophy. Despite the span and variety of his work, Ricoeur still managed to maintain a consistent theoretical core throughout the development of his phi losophy. His principal theoretical interest is concerned with the question of selfhood and personal identity, and his life-long motto—“a philosophy of detour” and “the long way of interpretation”—capture his hermeneutical approach to these questions (e.g. Ricoeur 1992: 16–23; Ricoeur 2004a: 255–260; Ricoeur 2008: 83–85).

Ricoeur develops his philosophy in dialogue with primarily three major philosophical tra Editions: French reflexive philosophy, German phenomenology, and Anglophone philoso phy. The three traditions shape his philosophical development marking various stages of 1 his intellectual life. Ricoeur was trained in reflexive philosophy, which was one of the (p. 73) dominant traditions in French philosophy in the first half of the twentieth century, and this tradition remained an active, albeit increasingly subdued element in his philoso phy. The tradition of reflexive philosophy originated in the eighteenth century with Maine de Bran, was continued by Felix Ravaisson in the nineteenth century, and developed fur her by Lon Brunschvicg, Jean Nabert, and Gabriel Marcel in the first half of the twenty eth century. This tradition is concerned with investigating how the subject becomes aware of itself as a self through the lived experience of thinking. It is a critical develop Bent of Descartes’s cogito, which is the primacy of reflection that emphasizes the lived and embodied character of reflection. Ricoeur’s work with the tradition of reflexive phi losophy is enriched and developed through his encounter with German phenomenology during the Second World War, which Ricoeur was spent as a prisoner of war in various camps. The years of imprisonment were foundational for his philosophical development. His status of officer provided him with several privileges, among which were long hours for study and the possibility of giving lectures on various philosophical topics to his fellow prisoners. Jasper and Husserl were the philosophers that he spent most time on during the prison years. The immediate fruits of these studies are his first two books on Jasper, a translation of Husserl’s Ideas I published in 1950, and several dense articles on Husserl’s phenomenology in the 1950s. While Jasper subsided into the background of his work, phenomenology re Gained the principal methodological tool throughout his career, and, as we shall see, his major contribution to philosophy is his hermeneutical development of phenomenology. From 1971 to his retirement in 1991 Ricoeur was the John Nuveen professor of divinity at the University of Chicago. The American years were extremely productive, and the en counter with Anglophone philosophy left a substantial imprint on Ricoeur’s late works. Ri coeur enters into critical discussions with prominent Anglophone philosophers, in particu lar concerning philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, and ethics. The result of these discussions is the development of his hermeneutical phenomenology into an influential narrative theory, and a complex theory of selfhood revolving around the normative challenges involved in personal identity (1992, 2004b, 2005). icing Christian and, while maintaining strict separation between his philosophical and theological work, he contributed with books and a vast amount of articles on religion and in particular the Christian tradition, which he considered to be one of the principal sources of Western philosophy. Despite the span and variety of his work, Ricoeur still managed to maintain a consistent theoretical core throughout the development of his phi losophy. His principal theoretical interest is concerned with the question of selfhood and personal identity, and his life-long motto—“a philosophy of detour” and “the long way of interpretation”—capture his hermeneutical approach to these questions (e.g. Ricoeur 1992: 16–23; Ricoeur 2004a: 255–260; Ricoeur 2008: 83–85).

Ricoeur develops his philosophy in dialogue with primarily three major philosophical tra Editions: French reflexive philosophy, German phenomenology, and Anglophone philoso phy. The three traditions shape his philosophical development marking various stages of 1 his intellectual life. Ricoeur was trained in reflexive philosophy, which was one of the (p. 73) dominant traditions in French philosophy in the first half of the twentieth century, and this tradition remained an active, albeit increasingly subdued element in his philoso phy. The tradition of reflexive philosophy originated in the eighteenth century with Maine de Bran, was continued by Felix Ravaisson in the nineteenth century, and developed fur her by Lon Brunschvicg, Jean Nabert, and Gabriel Marcel in the first half of the twenty eth century. This tradition is concerned with investigating how the subject becomes aware of itself as a self through the lived experience of thinking. It is a critical develop Bent of Descartes’s cogito, which is the primacy of reflection that emphasizes the lived and embodied character of reflection. Ricoeur’s work with the tradition of reflexive phi losophy is enriched and developed through his encounter with German phenomenology during the Second World War, which Ricoeur was spent as a prisoner of war in various camps. The years of imprisonment were foundational for his philosophical development. His status of officer provided him with several privileges, among which were long hours for study and the possibility of giving lectures on various philosophical topics to his fellow prisoners. Jasper and Husserl were the philosophers that he spent most time on during the prison years. The immediate fruits of these studies are his first two books on Jasper, a translation of Husserl’s Ideas I published in 1950, and several dense articles on Husserl’s phenomenology in the 1950s. While Jasper subsided into the background of his work, phenomenology re Gained the principal methodological tool throughout his career, and, as we shall see, his major contribution to philosophy is his hermeneutical development of phenomenology. From 1971 to his retirement in 1991 Ricoeur was the John Nuveen professor of divinity at the University of Chicago. The American years were extremely productive, and the en counter with Anglophone philosophy left a substantial imprint on Ricoeur’s late works. Ri coeur enters into critical discussions with prominent Anglophone philosophers, in particu lar concerning philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, and ethics. The result of these discussions is the development of his hermeneutical phenomenology into an influential narrative theory, and a complex theory of selfhood revolving around the normative challenges involved in personal identity (1992, 2004b, 2005).

Paul Ricoeur Ricoeur’s contribution to phenomenological psychopathology is still to be fully appreciate ed and explored. Although Ricoeur does not engage directly with psychopathology, he has published a seminal, and controversial, book on Freud and a great number of articles on psychoanalysis. Moreover, the central themes of Ricoeur’s author ship, in particular the conflictual character of selfhood and the normative challenges of personal identity, provide a fecund phenomenological foundation for psychopathology. In what follows, I will explicate Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenology and narrative theory, concluding with an outline of how his ethics of den sty can contribute to phenomenological psychopathology.

Hermeneutical Phenomenology Ricoeur’s approach to phenomenology engages with the history of phenomenology before and after Husserl and deals in particular with the philosophical limits of Husserl’s phe nomenology. As he writes in one of his surveys of Husserl’s phenomenology: “[P]Phenomenology (p. 74) is a vast project whose expression is not restricted to one work or to any specific group of works. It is less a doctrine than a method capable of many ex Amplifications of which Husserl exploited only a few” ( Ricoeur 1967b: 4). This historical perspective on phenomenology and his critical approach to Husserl’s project leads Ri coeur to develop a Kantian version of phenomenology that exploits the limits of a phe nomenological description to establish a normative theory of subjectivity. The entangle Bent of descriptive and normative aspects of human experience is central to his first ma jor phenomenological works on the challenges of human freedom, and remains a central theme throughout his works.

Ricoeur’s argument is that the difficulty of human freedom is caused by the conflictual character of human subjectivity. In fact, human beings experience themselves first and foremost through the fallible character of their will, and this Effective experience of our own limits results in a troubled sense of self that Ricoeur calls “a wounded Cogito [ un Cogito blessé ]” (1970: 439). Our sense of being a self is constantly troubled by a sense of otherness, and Husserl, on Ricoeur’s account, dissociative identity disorder not acknowledge this Effective dialed tics of self and otherness at the core of human experience nor dissociative identity disorder he explore the Korma Dive complexity involved in human emotional experience (Ricoeur 1967a: 175–201; Ri coeur 1986b: 266–270). The troubled sense of self prompts a constant self-questioning, which in turn makes interpretation fundamental to Ricoeur’s hermeneutical development of phenomenology.

The focus on affectivity and interpretation would make Heidegger an obvious choice for Ricoeur. However, Ricoeur criticizes Heidegger’s hermeneutical development of Husker Xian phenomenology for its exclusive focus on in the ontological depths of existence. Heidegger’s quest for a fundamental ontology, Ricoeur argues, blinds him to ethical teal lunges of human existence that Ricoeur himself made the foundation of his hermeneutical phenomenology (Ricoeur 1986a: 47–79; Ricoeur 2004a: 9–11). It is this insistence on the experiential primacy of ethics that makes Ricoeur argue that “Husserl dissociative identity disorder phenomenolo Paul Ricoeur gy, but Kant limited and founded it” ( Ricoeur 1967b: 201). In other words, the limits to Husserl’s descriptive analysis of experience, and to Heidegger’s normative hermeneutics of experience, become visible through Ricoeur’s adoption of a Kantian ethics of person hood.

To be a self is to become a person. This is the fundamental ethical challenge that consti Lutes the heart of Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenology. The human self experiences itself through thinking, and this thinking is always “wounded” in the sense that it is char acterized by Effective disturbances caused by an inescapable otherness that troubles the sense of selfhood. This dialectics of selfhood and otherness accounts for the non-coincide ing, conflictual character of human experience of being a self. Our sense of being a self is fragile and constantly disturbed, for better or worse, by an otherness that we cannot con tool. In order to live with this basic fragility of being a self we need to reappropriate our selves through the ethical task of becoming a person (Ricoeur 1986a: 69). Personhood is a normative ideal in the sense that it is a particular way to see, understand, and treat a human being—oneself as well as the other. Although it is an ideal, it is Ricoeur’s argue Bent that we cannot make descriptive sense of human subjectivity without it. The ideal of personhood allows us to make sense of the dialectics of self and otherness that is dis closed by our phenomenological investigation of human subjectivity. The self is never at rest with itself. To be a self is to exist through the otherness that makes the self a human self. This basic otherness makes itself known in and through the passivity that we expert Once through our body, our being situated in the world, through language, and most ins Lively through the encounter with the other person. This (p. 75) otherness is, as men toned, responsible for the fragile character of human self-awareness and that which makes human identity a task rather than a fact. Because human selfhood is constituted by an otherness that we cannot control our identity cannot be understood in terms of our sense of being ourselves. To be a self is more than being myself. Or as Ricoeur succinctly puts it: “To say self is not to say myself” ( Ricoeur 1992: 180). In other words, we need the notion of personhood to make sense of the dialectics of self and otherness in our troubled sense of self, and to reappropriate our identity through this dialectics. Ricoeur proposes a narrative approach to this task of becoming the person who we are.

Narrative Identity Ricoeur’s narrative approach to human identity is shaped by his exploration of Freud’s work with the conflicts of the human mind. Ricoeur is particularly inter Bested in Freud’s interpretative approach and his emphasis on the weight of the past. Freud taught us to be suspicious of human consciousness, and this suspicion brings out one of the limits of a phenomenological analysis, namely, the idea that we can make sense of human experience in terms of the pre-reflective experiential structures of human selfawareness. Central to Freud’s groundbreaking account of human identity is that human self-awareness is never transparent, but fraught with suppressed memories and union scions desires that constantly disrupt our sense of identity and complicate our existence. For Ricoeur, however, this seminal idea is also Freud’s weakness. The preoccupation with Paul Ricoeur the weight of the past and with the archaeology of libidinal desires blinds Freud to the significance of the future in our understanding of human identity. There is more to human identity than the traumas of past and the obscurity of our desires, so Ricoeur argues that we need a hermeneutical phenomenology that combines Freudian archaeology with Hegelian teleology to make sense of challenges to human identity (Ricoeur 1970: 460). While the former is concerned with a phenomenological description of the conflictual structure of identity, the latter is a hermeneutical endeavor to reconcile this conflict by finding a meaning or tells in our particular human existence.

Human selfhood is not merely marked by the constant disturbance of an otherness that we cannot control. Our sense of self is also characterized by an effort or a desire to find a meaning that can secure an existential continuity from past to future, and thus enable us to be reconciled with the otherness that disrupts our identity. The principal argument of Ricoeur’s hermeneutical approach to human identity is that this dialectics of disrupting archaeology and reconciling teleology is articulated in and through human language. To reappropriate our identity we have to engage with the complexity of the words, symbols, and metaphors that constitute our existence. Language, and in particular symbols and metaphors, brings out the dialectics of past and future by embedding us firmly in a cul Aural history that is not of our making, while at the same time allowing us to shape the fu Cure of our common culture through our individual words. Ricoeur’s work with language allows him to develop his account of human freedom, in particular, the normative demand of human autonomy and the involuntary aspects of this autonomy. Language manifests this ambiguity of autonomy. We express ourselves in words that we have not created, and we cannot control the meaning of these words or how they are perceived and understood by those with whom we talk. Language is the manifestation of an evolving (p. 76) surplus of meaning. We cannot escape the problem of interpretation—our own as well as that of the other: The man who speaks in symbols is first of all a narrator [ un récitant ]; he transmits an abundance of meaning over which he has little command and thus makes him think. This thickness of manifold meaning is what solicits his understanding [ intel ligence ]; interpretation consists less in suppressing ambiguity than in understand ing it and in explicating its richness!

(Ricoeur 1970: 49; translation modified)

Our identity is entangled with and partly constituted by the stories that we tell ourselves and others. Our story-telling is, on Ricoeur’s account, a way to make sense of the aporet ics of temporality. This aporetics consists in the fact that human temporality cannot be re Educed to our personal experience of time nor to the impersonal cosmic time that governs the universe. Human temporality is a “third kind of time” ( Ricoeur 1988: 245) that is made up by the “discordant concordance” of impersonal cosmic time and lived phenom nological time, that is, by the way time affects us involuntarily and by how we voluntarily understand and shape time.

Paul Ricoeur This third kind of time, proper human time, is configured through narratives, and these narratives constitute the fragile sense of personal identity that makes possible a human life. This narrative identity is fragile because the stories that we tell about ourselves, about who we are, are interwoven with the inarticulate otherness of what we are (e.g. our biology, our parents, our culture, our loved ones). Our words are that which secure conch unity between our past and our future, but our identity cannot be reduced to the stories that we tell about ourselves. On the contrary, Ricoeur’s theory of narrative identity is con corned with the various forms of otherness that challenge our identity. These are the as Sects of our identity that we have not chosen and cannot extricate ourselves from. It is a theory that is meant to help us become the person who we are, that is, to reappropriate ourselves through the dialectics of selfhood and otherness that Ricoeur explored in his early works.

The fragility of our narrative identity becomes most manifest in our encounter with the other person, which is also why the key notion of Ricoeur’s understanding of personal identity is “keeping one’s word” ( Ricoeur 1992: 113–139; Ricoeur 2005: 99–109). Many aspects of our identity are simply a matter of physiological and psychological inertia through time. We grow older minute-by-minute, year by year, and innumerable aspects of our life are the result of more or less mindless habits. This means that in a certain sense our identity is secured by our sheer physical existence. Ricoeur categorizes these fund mental aspects of human identity under the notion of “sameness” or “idem,” and he has dedicated hundreds of pages to meticulous phenomenological analyses of these involun Cary aspects of our identity throughout his career. Although he acknowledges the importance of the “sameness” of our identity, he is still convinced that our identity depends on our conscious struggle against the inertia, against “the most perfidious of passions, the passion to become a thing again” ( Ricoeur 1966: 297). In other words, our identity is more than the mere fact of our existence; it is a nor Dative challenge. We are responsible for who we are, even though so many aspects of what we are out of our control. Our identity becomes personal through the responsible reappropriation of ourselves in and through the disruptive changes of time. Ricoeur cap Cures this normative aspect of our identity with the notion “keeping one’s word” or “Apse” ( Ricoeur 1992: 118–119).

The fragility of our narrative identity becomes most manifest in our encounter with the other person, which is also why the key notion of Ricoeur’s understanding of personal identity is “keeping one’s word” ( Ricoeur 1992: 113–139; Ricoeur 2005: 99–109). Many aspects of our identity are simply a matter of physiological and psychological inertia through time. We grow older minute-by-minute, year by year, and innumerable aspects of our life are the result of more or less mindless habits. This means that in a certain sense our identity is secured by our sheer physical existence. Ricoeur categorizes these fund mental aspects of human identity under the notion of “sameness” or “idem,” and he has dedicated hundreds of pages to meticulous phenomenological analyses of these involun Cary aspects of our identity throughout his career. Although he acknowledges the importance of the “sameness” of our identity, he is still convinced that our identity depends on our conscious struggle against the inertia, against “the most perfidious of passions, the passion to become a thing again” ( Ricoeur 1966: 297). In other words, our identity is more than the mere fact of our existence; it is a nor Dative challenge. We are responsible for who we are, even though so many aspects of what we are out of our control. Our identity becomes personal through the responsible reappropriation of ourselves in and through the disruptive changes of time. Ricoeur cap Cures this normative aspect of our identity with the notion “keeping one’s word” or “Apse” ( Ricoeur 1992: 118–119).

(p. 77) Ricoeur’s theory of narrative identity is the culmination of his hermeneutical phe nomenology that combines a Husserlian emphasis on a descriptive approach to the con Crete givenness of the world with a Kantian insistence on the normative character of be ing a human person. Moreover, it testifies to the persistent dialectical character of Ricoeur’s thinking. Narrative identity is constituted by the dialectics of a description of “the sameness” or “the idem” of what we are and the normative demand to become our selves or “the Apse” of who we are by “keeping our word.” It is this dialectical aspect of his conception of narrative identity that provides perhaps the most promising contribu son to phenomenological psychopathology.

Paul Ricoeur # The Dialectical Model of Suffering Karl Jasper played, as mentioned, a foundational role in Ricoeur’s philosophical develop Bent. Jasper’s philosophy of existence was the topic of his first two books, and particu Carly the dialectical character of Jasper’s thinking has left an enduring mark on Ricoeur’s work. The dialectical approach to the human person pervades Jasper’s psychopathology and is central to his work with the patient’s attitude or position-taking ( Stellungnahme ) toward her illness (Jasper 1997: 414–427). Jasper’s argument is that understanding mental illness requires an account of how the person reflectively responds to and makes sense of her suffering. A psychopathological account of a person’s suffering must begin with the acknowledgment that there is always “an awareness of one’s awareness” at play in suffering, and that this awareness shapes the illness that we seek to understand psy chopathologically (Jasper 1997: 400). Mental suffering, in other words, is dialectical in the sense that the brute fact of suffering is always complicated by the person’s interpret son of her suffering. This dialectical model of mental illness has had a significant bearing on the theories of major phenomenological psychopathologists in the twentieth century such as Eugène Minkowski, Wolfgang Blankenburg, and Kimura Bin.

Ricoeur’s account of narrative identity can be used as a tool to develop this dialectical model and to articulate the problem of autonomy as a major factor in mental illness. The patient of a mental illness is always an agent who relates herself to her illness, and she exists with and tries to make sense of her suffering through narratives. Ricoeur’s theory of narratives can help us bring out the autonomy at work in the passivity of suffering. The experience of suffering is passive in the sense that we experience suffering as something that happens to us, as an involuntary disturbance of our sense of being a self. This passim ity enhances the suffering involved in a mental illness because of the undermining effect it has on our autonomy. Suffering makes us feel incapac Stated, vulnerable, and at times utterly helpless. Narratives can be used a way to cope with this sense of passivity because, as Ricoeur argues, “[w]hat sedimentation has con traced, the narrative can redeploy” (1992: 122; translation modified). Narratives Bede ploy the fact of suffering as the normative task of regaining our sense of autonomy. This is not to say that narratives make suffering less painful or disturbing. On the contrary, the phenomenological character of Ricoeur’s theory of narratives articulates the various ex periential aspects of suffering, while providing a hermeneutical account of how to help the patient reappropriate her sense of autonomy in and through this experience of suffer ing. PAGE_BREAK Notes: 1 ( ) For thorough accounts of Ricoeur’s life and intellectual development, see Doze 2008; Greisch 2001. For accessible and concise introductions to his life and work in English, see Reagan 1996; Sims 2003; Pellauer 2007; Pellauer and Dauenhauer 2016.

René Rosfort The Søren Kierkegaard Research Center, University of Copenhagen Emmanuel Levinas Emmanuel Levinas Richard A. Cohen The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Emmanuel Levinas, twentieth-century French phenomenologist and ethical/political philosopher, critically reappraises the meaning, grounds, and significance of intelligibility in relation to the irreducible transcendence and alterity of the other person conceived as my moral responsibility for you, rather than in ontology, epistemology, or aesthetics. Based in original phenomenological studies of human sensibility as vulnerable and mor tal, as both suffering and moral capacity to alleviate suffering, Levinas finds in ethics the ultimate guidance for achieving mental health and a new approach to psychopathology beyond such standards as integral coherence or conformity to conventions. Human digni ty is attained or regained through the obligations of moral responsibility to and for the other person, and ultimately, based thereupon, in responsibility to and for all others by contributing to the attainment of social justice.

Keywords: Levinas, ethics, other, responsibility, justice, moral, obligations, vulnerability, transcendence, alterity # Introduction EMMANUEL Levinas is a phenomenological philosopher of ethics. His great originality and importance derives from two elements or dimensions of his thought. One, and no doubt central, the primacy of ethics: an argument that intelligibility, sense, and significance, originate not in knowing but in moral responsibility and justice. Two, scion tific contributions: rigorous phenomenological investigations conducted in various re ions of signification such as sensibility, worldliness, Bros, and temporality. The latter have the additional virtue, or ambition, of contesting and correcting the earlier and more celebrated phenomenological studies of Martin Heidegger in Being and Time. Lev ins is at once one of the masters of the rigorous science of phenomenology, in France having been one of the first and leading expositors of Husserl and Heidegger, having en aged in and published many fundamental and original phenomenological studies of his own. And then, as well, he moved beyond the borders of phenomenology, outside the lim its of Poetic-noematic “intentionality,” and through many lectures and publications pro Emmanuel Levinas posed what is perhaps the most original and outstanding twentieth-century continental philosophy of ethics, an ethics which profoundly makes sense of the “humanity of the hu man.” Each of these by itself is an extraordinary accomplishment; together they place Levinas in the top tier of world philosophers. Two basic ideas orient his thought: first, knowledge, to be knowledge, must acknowledge its roots in moral responsibility; and sec ond, moral responsibility means helping others, putting the other first, and such solidi tousness is the highest priority of all the exigencies which compete for human attention. To be human is to aid others. Thus Levinas breaks with both monodic and totalizing philosophies: the self, to be itself, must be for-the-other.

Biographical Sketch Levinas was born in 1906 in Kaunas, Lithuania, into a traditional Jewish home. In 1923 he left for university studies in Strasbourg, France. During 1928 to 1929 he studied under Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger in nearby Freiburg, Germany. In 1930 he pub Dished (p. 81) The Theory of Intuition in Husserl’s Phenomenology, the first book in French on Husserl’s phenomenology. “It is,” Levinas wrote, “precisely the method by which we are going back to concrete man” (1973: 146). He also became a French citizen, married, and became a teacher at the Alliance Israelite Universelle in Paris. In 1939 he was con scripted into the French army, served as a translator of German and Russian, in 1940 be came a prisoner-of-war and spent the duration of the war in Germany in a labor camp, part of a Jewish section. After the war, he returned to his job, was made Director in 1947, and re-engaged in Parisian intellectual life. In two short books of 1947, Existence and Ex stent and Time and the Other, Levinas began articulating his own ethical philosophy uti Sizing the phenomenological method. Breaking new philosophical ground by finding the roots of intelligibility not in knowing but in moral responsibility and justice, the primacy of ethics became the central claim of all his subsequent thought, including his two maxis Aerial books, Totality and Infinity, and Otherwise than Being or Beyond Essence. Each year from 1957 to 1989 Levinas delivered the keynote address, known as a “Talmudic Reading,” at the annual Colloquium of Jewish Intellectuals which he helped to establish. In 1961 he was made Professor of Philosophy at Poitier; in 1967 at Paris-Nan terse; and finally, from 1973 to 1976, at Paris-Sorbonne. To the end of the 1980s, Levinas, in lectures, articles, and collections, continued to elaborate, refine, and deepen his orig nal ethical philosophy. Following several years of dementia, he died in 1995.

Ethics and Phenomenology Though his outlook is comprehensive, Levinas’s contributions to philosophy and to psy chopathology can be analytically sorted under two headings: phenomenological and ethic cal. Both appear throughout his writings, especially insofar as Levinas’s ethics is not ab tract but concrete, the singular requirements of the other and others impinging on and arousing the singular moral and juridical responsibility of the self. Indeed, the inextrica ble relationship between knowledge (ordinary, scientific, and phenomenological), and Emmanuel Levinas goodness, is an explicit and central topic of Levinas’s thought. In the following, where I turn to three key elements—body, world, and time—of Levinas’s thought, I focus primarily on his magnum opus, Totality and Infinity. Here Levinas’s phenomenological stud ies are original and well-developed and here so too is his ethics. Not surprisingly his sec ond major work, Otherwise than Being or Beyond Essence, deepens many of his earlier themes, especially regarding the character and significance of moral agency and language. Nonetheless all the major themes of Levinas’s philosophy are already found in Totality and Infinity. A second reason I will draw from Totality and Infinity is because its phenomenological studies are so clearly worked out and, while pursuing a path opened up by Heidegger, do not flinch from rejecting the primacy Heidegger accords to ontology and contesting the results of Heidegger’s earlier phenomenological studies.

Also the arrangement of the text of Totality and Infinity lends itself to our interests. Sub section two, entitled “Inferiority and Economy,” is primarily phenomenological; and sub section three, entitled “Exteriority and the Face,” is primarily ethical. Thus Totality and Infinity lends itself to seeing the multi-layered and complex meanings of subjectivity and worldliness and then appreciating more clearly and precisely the impact of the otherness of (p. 82) the other person on such worldly subjectivity. Thus, to use terms taken from grammar, we begin with the nominative, and see how it is put into the accusative. To be sure, ethics does not come “after” ontology in a chronological sense. Indeed, ethics has priority, it “comes first” in the sense that its imperatives trump the imperatives to know and to will. Nevertheless, this analytical division between phenomenology and ethics is il Ruminating.

One of Heidegger’s great insights, building on Edmund Husserl’s notion of “intentional ty,” was that subjectivity is not monodic, not a cogito or substance in opposition to the world. Rather, humans are always already “in-the-world,” they are in this sense “ecstatic” beings, projected not self-contained. For this reason Heidegger drops the very term “sub Sect” and replaces it with the term “ Casein,” which in ordinary German means “xis Fence,” but in Heidegger’s usage refers to “being there” out in the world. Humans are thus worldly beings in their very essence. To be and to be there, in the world, is the same thing for humans. So Heidegger’s phenomenological question is not “How do we know there are other minds?” but “What is the character of the worldly being which we are?” His answer is twofold. First, the world is what he calls an “instrumental totality.” That is to say, the world is not first something we know, but something we use, an instrumental engagement. A hammer, for instance, is a hammer not when I cognize it, but when I ham mer away at something, that is, when I use it. The second feature of the world, to which we will turn shortly, is that it is historical, that we are permeated by a meaningfulness that comes from and through historical development.

Levinas agrees that human subjectivity is not a monad or substance. Nevertheless, re Carding Heidegger’s first point, that the world is an instrumental totality, Levinas’s phe nomenological investigations discover something important which, Levinas argues, Heidegger’s analyses overlooked and left out. And this is that the world is not first a tool; it is something enjoyed. The hammer, then, is not simply what it is when one is hammer Emmanuel Levinas ing, but it is even more primitively something one enjoys handling. The world is first, then, sensational rather than instrumental. The sun is not just for light; one enjoys its warmth on one’s arms; one enjoys the brilliance of colors. While this difference may not seem to be particularly important, it is actually the basis for the entire disagreement be tween Heideggerian ontology and Levinasian ethics. This is because Levinas’s philosophy starts not with technology, but with sensibility, with the flesh-and-blood person. While in his later thought Heidegger’s major worry is the dehumanization effected by modern technology, Levinas’s major worry is always the suffering of flesh-and-blood human be Dings, the suffering of pain, mental anguish, deprivation, hunger, illness, as well as the suf Bering caused by injustice. Because Levinas begins with the body as sensibility, in consed ring the meaning of being-in-the-world he never overlooks, as Heidegger dissociative identity disorder, the moral imperatives that arise to alleviate concrete sensible suffering.

Regarding the second point about worldliness, its historical character, here again Levinas parts company from Heidegger. The meaning of human being-in-the-world does not, for Levinas, come from the world as a historical formation, does not come—contrary to Ger man Idealism—from History personified, Deist, or world Epochs. Or to put this in another way: transcendence for Levinas is not a function of history. Rather, it is a function of the other person. History, for Levinas, is not sufficiently “other,” does not free the self from the circuits of immanence. On first sight this may appear to be quite an odd claim. All of history immanent to subjectivity, it seems so unlikely. But the real issue at stake is the source of meaning. Does meaning come to humans from History, like a modern substitute for God, or are humans the makers of history, history being a human project? And if hist ry is a human (p. 83) project, in what way is history genuinely transcendent, genuinely other? For Levinas, the greatest, indeed the only, absolute alterity is the alterity of the other person. This is what he calls “the face of the other.” “This infinity, stronger than murder, already resists us in his face, is his face, is the primordial expression, is the first 1 word: ‘you shall not commit murder.’ ” The face is neither an ontological nor an historical alterity, but the perspective from which being and history can be evaluated. It is a moral force, the force of weakness, of vulnerability, a call to my own responsibility to and for the other as other. “There is here a relation not with a very great resistance, but with some 2 thing absolutely other: the resistance of what has no resistance—the ethical resistance.” The only genuine escape from narcissism, conceived broadly—or one could invoke such terms as “projection,” “cathexis,” “identification,” or even “co-dependence”—the only re Cation whose terms cannot be assimilated to one another, contained, or integrated, is the infinite obligation toward and aroused by the other person. This relation—which Levinas 3 calls a “relation without relation,” because the self is not destroyed or obliterated in it, but rather exists as “turned inside out” for the other—is from the first a moral one, re sponsibility to and for the other. Such is each person’s highest vocation, to alleviate the suffering of the other, and of all others. So it is not from history that the self finds the highest meaning of its life, but from service to the other person, and in relation to such service history itself must be judged. ing, but it is even more primitively something one enjoys handling. The world is first, then, sensational rather than instrumental. The sun is not just for light; one enjoys its warmth on one’s arms; one enjoys the brilliance of colors. While this difference may not seem to be particularly important, it is actually the basis for the entire disagreement be tween Heideggerian ontology and Levinasian ethics. This is because Levinas’s philosophy starts not with technology, but with sensibility, with the flesh-and-blood person. While in his later thought Heidegger’s major worry is the dehumanization effected by modern technology, Levinas’s major worry is always the suffering of flesh-and-blood human be Dings, the suffering of pain, mental anguish, deprivation, hunger, illness, as well as the suf Bering caused by injustice. Because Levinas begins with the body as sensibility, in consed ring the meaning of being-in-the-world he never overlooks, as Heidegger dissociative identity disorder, the moral imperatives that arise to alleviate concrete sensible suffering.

Regarding the second point about worldliness, its historical character, here again Levinas parts company from Heidegger. The meaning of human being-in-the-world does not, for Levinas, come from the world as a historical formation, does not come—contrary to Ger man Idealism—from History personified, Deist, or world Epochs. Or to put this in another way: transcendence for Levinas is not a function of history. Rather, it is a function of the other person. History, for Levinas, is not sufficiently “other,” does not free the self from the circuits of immanence. On first sight this may appear to be quite an odd claim. All of history immanent to subjectivity, it seems so unlikely. But the real issue at stake is the source of meaning. Does meaning come to humans from History, like a modern substitute for God, or are humans the makers of history, history being a human project? And if hist ry is a human (p. 83) project, in what way is history genuinely transcendent, genuinely other? For Levinas, the greatest, indeed the only, absolute alterity is the alterity of the other person. This is what he calls “the face of the other.” “This infinity, stronger than murder, already resists us in his face, is his face, is the primordial expression, is the first 1 word: ‘you shall not commit murder.’ ” The face is neither an ontological nor an historical alterity, but the perspective from which being and history can be evaluated. It is a moral force, the force of weakness, of vulnerability, a call to my own responsibility to and for the other as other. “There is here a relation not with a very great resistance, but with some 2 thing absolutely other: the resistance of what has no resistance—the ethical resistance.” The only genuine escape from narcissism, conceived broadly—or one could invoke such terms as “projection,” “cathexis,” “identification,” or even “co-dependence”—the only re Cation whose terms cannot be assimilated to one another, contained, or integrated, is the infinite obligation toward and aroused by the other person. This relation—which Levinas 3 calls a “relation without relation,” because the self is not destroyed or obliterated in it, but rather exists as “turned inside out” for the other—is from the first a moral one, re sponsibility to and for the other. Such is each person’s highest vocation, to alleviate the suffering of the other, and of all others. So it is not from history that the self finds the highest meaning of its life, but from service to the other person, and in relation to such service history itself must be judged.

Emmanuel Levinas Finally, Levinas will propose an entirely new notion of time. Perhaps nothing has been more radical in contemporary philosophy than time, because the overcoming of classical thought has only been achieved by overturning its illusory exit from time to “eternity,” its sub specie aeternitatis. Heidegger in Being and Time (notice the title), following Henri Bergson and Husserl, made an “ecstatic” theory of time fundamental to all signification. Casein’s being-in-the-world was a projection into the future and a retrieval from the past, personally in being-toward-death, and ontologically in the unfolding of history’s dispense sons. No doubt ecstatic theories of temporality, including Heidegger’s, represent a great advance over the previously prevalent “clock” theory of time, time as a series of instants, which Bergson had exposed as the measure of space rather than the flow of duration. But Levinas, while accepting this advance up to a point, is not content. What he discovers, and it is a remarkable discovery, is that the futurity of the future, the “not yet” which can not be brought into the present, cannot be sustained through projection. Rather, such transcendence, if it is to retain its alterity, must depend on that which is truly transcend dent, namely, the face of the other. Time, then, is neither objective nor subjective, but in tersubjective.

Levinas’s insights into time are so original that they are difficult to understand let alone appreciate at first glance. Yet his argument is compelling. The future cannot be truly fu Cure, truly novel and “not” yet, if it is a projection. The past cannot be truly past if it is a retrieval. For a genuine future and past, a genuine temporality, time must be bound to the transcendence of the other person, the only genuinely absolute transcendence, and that transcendence, as we have seen, arises only as morality and justice. Levinas, as a philoso fer, will take this step: time is intersubjective, hence time is a function of morality and justice. So what is truly future, not yet, novel, is not some distant project of mine or of history’s, but the unachieved world of justice. So also what is truly past, gone, immemori al, irretrievable, cannot be (p. 84) a function of human memory or appropriation, but is rather the lateness, the “too late” of my moral obligation to alleviate the suffering of the other. The moral subject is always too late on the scene, and always too early for the world of justice, which is humanity’s ultimate aspiration. Time, then, is a matter of ethics, not ontology, not memory, not history. It is an radical insight, and these few pages cannot do it full justice.

Importance for Psychotherapy In the last few decades Levinas’s philosophy—despite the difficulty, its enormous erudi son and catholic range, uncompromising rigor, profundity, and an originality bursting in catachrestic style—is increasingly being recognized, discussed, and appropriated by psy chologists and psychotherapists. Two recent collections attest to this: Psychotherapy for 4 the Other: Levinas and the Face-to-Face Relationship, whose contributors are all practice ing psychotherapists; and Psychology for the Other: Levinas, Ethics and the Practice of 5 Psychology, whose contributors are professors of psychology and professors of philoso phy.

Emmanuel Levinas Yet Levinas has written no explicit therapies. Nor has he written much explicitly about psychology, psychoanalysis, psychopathology, or psychotherapy. Indeed, his attitude to ward psychoanalysis, once a fashion of Parisian and European intellectuals following 6 Jacques Laban, has been dismissive. The great interest and importance of Levinas for psychopathologists (and for other theoreticians and practitioners in psychology), howev er, derives from grasping the character and significance of his philosophy, however, and more specifically from an appreciation for the meaning and consequences of his central idea that the human is defined not by knowledge, nor by feeling, for that matter, and even 7 less by self-interest or self-esteem, but rather through the exigencies of moral response Ability. In other words, psychology and psychopathologists can learn and improve their self-understanding and their therapeutic work by grasping Levinas’s philosophy, as a phi losophy that is at once and fundamentally an ethics, a philosophy for which morality counts most.

Inasmuch as psychopathology’s idea of health depends, as it must, on a more or less welldefined self-understanding of what it means to be a flourishing human being, then Lev ins is important, accordingly, because he articulates with depth and precision a filo sophical anthropology. But more specifically Levinas’s philosophical anthropology is con caved through the lens of ethics, of good and evil, justice and injustice, in contrast to the pre-eminence philosophy usually accords to knowledge and truth claims. It is not to critic Size or denigrate knowledge and truth, however, that Levinas turns to ethics, but precise ly the reverse, for, so he argues, it is in ethics that science finds its proper and necessary ground, lacking which science distorts its own purview, for instance as one finds in all forms of positivism. Thus for Levinas (p. 85) the distinctions between “reality and appear Once” and “true and false,” whose coordination so many philosophies have presented as ultimate, turn out to be dependent on the deeper and conditioning distinction between “is and ought.” Instead of conceiving that latter distinction subject to the rule of being or knowledge, as philosophers are wont to do, Levinas conceives morality morally, as it were, finding the orientation and priority of the “ought,” the imperatives of morality, as all deriving from the priority of the other person’s needs as my moral commands.

Inasmuch as psychopathology’s idea of health depends, as it must, on a more or less welldefined self-understanding of what it means to be a flourishing human being, then Lev ins is important, accordingly, because he articulates with depth and precision a filo sophical anthropology. But more specifically Levinas’s philosophical anthropology is con caved through the lens of ethics, of good and evil, justice and injustice, in contrast to the pre-eminence philosophy usually accords to knowledge and truth claims. It is not to critic Size or denigrate knowledge and truth, however, that Levinas turns to ethics, but precise ly the reverse, for, so he argues, it is in ethics that science finds its proper and necessary ground, lacking which science distorts its own purview, for instance as one finds in all forms of positivism. Thus for Levinas (p. 85) the distinctions between “reality and appear Once” and “true and false,” whose coordination so many philosophies have presented as ultimate, turn out to be dependent on the deeper and conditioning distinction between “is and ought.” Instead of conceiving that latter distinction subject to the rule of being or knowledge, as philosophers are wont to do, Levinas conceives morality morally, as it were, finding the orientation and priority of the “ought,” the imperatives of morality, as all deriving from the priority of the other person’s needs as my moral commands.

Levinas Preconceives “selfhood” in terms of a being-for-the-other initiated not in the self by itself but through obligation and responsibility to and for the other person. Thus the self, through responsibility, is not an “identity,” like a fortress, but a “non-identity,” “deposed,” or “an-arctic,” in the etymological sense of the latter term (i.e. not finding its “principle” within itself), a being-for-the-other, the singularizing of a moral self hood—a self-emptying rather that a self-aggrandizement—across its obligations and responsibili 8 ties to and for the other person. Levinas goes so far as to call the moral self “maternal,” taking the image of the pregnant woman bearing the other within herself, and appropri Utes the term “trauma” to indicate the full extent of the other’s impact on my moral agency: my “I” is introjected as a “for-the-other,” but a for-the-other that makes sense be Bond the understanding of being or knowledge, but in the singularity of moral responsibil ity. In Levinas’s own words: “The proximity of the neighbor in its trauma does not only strike up against me, but exalts and elevates me, and, in the literal sense of the term, in spires me. Inspiration, heteronomy, is the very pneuma of the psyche.... The for-the-oth Emmanuel Levinas er characteristic of the subject can be interpreted neither as a guilt complex (which pre supposes an initial freedom), nor as a natural benevolence or divine ‘instinct,’ nor as 9 some love or some tendency to sacrifice.”

The self is thus centered in its decentering: for-the-other before being-for-itself. Its “be fore” can only be maintained, and can only find its true sense, as a moral orientation, the moral priority of aiding the other person, which takes precedence over all the willfulness and self-interest of the self by itself. Or as Levinas succinctly writes: “No one is good vol unwarily,” and completes the sentence, from the other side, as it were, “no one is enslaved 10 to the Good.” Its center—or Recenter—is thus a self-for-the-other prior to being-for-it self, a self as moral responsibility elicited by the priority of the vulnerability not of itself but of the other, the other’s needs, the other’s suffering, and built upon this priority it is decentered toward everyone’s responsibility to contribute to the making of a society of justice for all.

Here, then, the human being, and per implication mental health, is no longer defined by self-interest or self-satisfaction, or even by self-enrichment or self-fulfillment, all the usual ways by which the self’s quest for ontological or existential wholeness have so often been justified, especially by psychology. Rather, the human self—the humanity of the human— arises as goodness, compassion, the elevation of a responsibility to and for the other, in facing the neighbor morally, and in facing all others through the labors of justice and its institutions. We must keep in mind, in order to quiet the carping voices of instrumental reason which are raised everywhere today, not to mention the narrowmindedness of psi tivism, cost–benefit analysis, and a ubiquitous commodification, that Levinas wrote nei her self-help manuals nor inspirational spiritual literature. His is a rigorous philosophy, but in an ethical key. In the full rigor of his difficult philosophical works, based on strict and clear phenomenological (p. 86) intuitions, strength of argumentation, and the most careful attention to the meaning and status of importance, the importance of importance, he refused to reduce the meaningful to the knowledge requirements of a quantitative ob jectivity. Thus he is neither a positivist nor a dreamer, but a philosopher determined—de spite the great difficulties—to give fair hearing to the primacy demanded by ethical im Operatives.

The achievement of mental health, from such a perspective, would depend not on repair ing the stressed or broken defenses of a stronghold self. It would depend not on a retreat into the safety and closure of an insular thing-like solidity. But rather mental health would demand raising the self to the dignity which arises through respect for the other person as moral obligation, and respect for all others through the tasks of creating a just society. These are not expendable glosses. Ethics is not a luxury. Nothing is more important, Both ing closer to our true being, than alleviating the suffering of others. “Nothing,” Levinas 11 writes, “is more grave, more august, than responsibility for the other.” “The word I 12 means here I am, answering for everything and for everyone.” Thus health—to be a flourishing human being—comes not in the proud independence of an impossible self-suf ficiency, not in the fortress ego, but in the weakness, as it were, the pacific non-fulfillment and vulnerability, the self-sacrifice of moral striving. To serve the other is each person’s Emmanuel Levinas highest vocation. True humanity, and hence mental health, comes in realizing and rising to the command that nothing is better than helping others. Mental health comes in help ing others, through compassion and giving, for in giving to others one gives of the self, and that self, the self that gives, for-the-other, is our better being.

Conclusion What should be evident is that Levinas’s philosophy, if taken seriously by psychology and psychopathology, represents a significant paradigm shift, a breakthrough, conceiving the human not in objective or subjective terms, but more deeply, or higher, in the ethical terms which represent what is noblest about humans, their humanity. Truth, and health, lies not in being or non-being, but in what is more precious, what is best, for you and for all of us. PAGE_BREAK Critiques and Integration of Phenomenology: Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze Federico Leon The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Phenomenology played a central role in twentieth-century philosophy. But, from the sec ond half of the century, many alternative philosophical movements emerged. Despite their radical criticism of phenomenology, they regularly touched upon themes that had been originally propounded by phenomenology itself. This is true of Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, and Giles Deleuze. At the basis of their approaches, there is the need for a new version of the transcendental, the idea of an impure transcendental, and the intuition of a non-transcendental structure of the transcendental, which they all name “difference.” Phenomenology could draw useful insights from these perspectives: e.g., a more continua ous view of the range of psychopathological experiences; a more exact comprehension of the different temporal and spatial structures of psychopathological worlds, as the internal possibilities and infinitesimal variations of the transcendental; and a more critical way of thinking through the structure of institutions and the normativity that dominates them.

Keywords: Derrida, Deleuze, Foucault, phenomenology, transcendental, non-transcendental, difference, variation, normativity # Introduction PHENOMENOLOGY is a vast philosophical movement that played a central role in the philosophical debates of the first half of the twentieth century. From the second half of the twentieth century Inwards, many alternative philosophical movements gradually emerged. However, despite their often radical criticism of the phenomenological ap roach, these movements regularly touched upon themes or adopted perspectives that had been originally propounded or developed by phenomenology. This is true of Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, and Giles Deleuze: three protagonists of late twentieth-century French thought and three still extremely influential alternatives to phenomenological thinking (but whose contribution to phenomenology may well prove fruitful). We could give a preliminary definition of phenomenology, obi Critiques and Integration of Phenomenology: Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze ously a very partial and questionable one. If we define phenomenology as the study of the most general and profound structures of human experience, as the study of the transcend dental structure of perception, of affection, of imagination, of desire, and so on, then we could say that there is a shared question at the basis of the approach to phenomenology taken by Derrida, Foucault, and Deleuze. This is the question of a new version of the ran scendental, a version in which the desubjectivization, the historicization, the dissemina son, in one word the impurity of the transcendental, are placed in the foreground.

Jacques Derrida Jacques Derrida began his career as a scholar of Husserl, to whom he devoted at least three important works of his early period: a large study, The Problem of Genesis in Husserl’s (p. 89) Philosophy, written in the early 1950s, but published only in 1990; the Introduction to Husserl’s Origin of Geometry, a detailed and compelling interpretation of the appendix to Husserl’s The Crisis of European Sciences (a text that had soon begun to circulate widely as an independent excerpt); and Voice and Phenomenon, which was literally an anticipation of all the topics later de eloped by Derrida, once again in the form of an intense, careful, and original dialogue with the philosophy of Husserl. This particular text can be seen as a general introduction to Derrida’s overall interpretation of Husserl’s thought. On the one hand, Derrida’s critic ism was aimed at showing simply the impossibility of phenomenology; on the other, his interpretation revived a perspective that Husserl himself had in part foreseen or at least adumbrated. If the main area of focus of Husserl’s phenomenology was human expert Once in its living presence, and if the great ambition of phenomenology was a first-hand description of that same living and immediate presence, then the objection advanced by Derrida was simple: the living presence does’t exist and a fortiori cannot be the object of a phenomenological description.

Derrida not only argued for this impossibility, but also showed that the very descriptions and concepts elaborated by Husserl implied such an outcome. The element identified by Derrida in the text of Husserl was precise: it was the notion of “retention,” which Husserl had placed at the center of his phenomenology of temporality. According to Husserl, the living present “retains” in itself what is no longer present, what has just happened, which in turn had retained in itself what had just happened, and so on. The present, according to Husserl’s famous imagery, is like the “comet tail” of Detentions. Without retention, therefore, there would be no present. The very meaning of present depends on this relationship with the past and on the directionality established by this relationship. However, if this is true—and here lies precisely Derrida’s objection—then nothing is ever really present and the present is never an original given: in the beginning there was not presence, but retention, or, better, a trace of presence and origin. This means, for exam ple, that there is no such thing as perception or a truly living body: perception is always the deciphering of an enigma, a relationship not with an object but with something Mimi lar to a text. The living body is invariably a web of otherness and intermittency, a body not actually alive but tainted by a foreign element, by a sort of mortality constitutive of Critiques and Integration of Phenomenology: Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze life. Again, if the transcendental is understood as a pure and foundational principle, if every purity is intrinsically tainted by something foreign, if every foundation always Jedi Sects to something else and a sign always mars every origin, then there is no longer a subject or transcendental subjectivity. The transcendental is replaced by a senseless and indiscernible mechanism in which an absence is also a presence or vice versa.

Psychiatry and phenomenological psychopathology do not seem to have assimilated all the possible consequences of Derrida’s position. However, his idea of a presence always mingled with an absence and of a body essentially tainted by otherness could perhaps al low us to understand that there is something structurally unstable and ungraspable in the Husserlian or Merleau-Pontiac Lab. A kind of psychotic destiny seems to be consubstan ital to the body. For this reason, the notion of madness in the broadest sense of the term should be—not simply on the basis of a humanistic appeal to understanding and universal acceptance—fully reintroduced in the concept of humanity, and more precisely in the transcendental structure of the human dimension that phenomenology has always tried to grasp. Compared to the psychopathological approach, which has often placed at the basis of its investigation this transcendental structure as a kind of theme where the variations or (p. 90) alterations are the psychopathological experiences, Derrida’s approach is the in verse: the variations precede the theme, and the alteration is coextensive with the living presence. In other words: madness is the structural foundation of experience, not its oc casional collapse.

Michel Foucault Michel Foucault’s first major work, Madness and Civilization, published in 1961, proved to be immensely influential. Early on, Foucault had devoted a number of important stud ies to the history of psychology, to German philosophy of medicine, and to phenomenology cal psychology and psychiatry (he had written a large and original introduction to Lud wig Binswanger’s Dream and Existence ). Madness and Civilization, which was to be fol lowed by an extensive course entitled Abnormal, marked a first major shift. For Foucault it was no longer a matter of reflecting on the experience of madness, but rather to show that madness had a history, and that this was not a history of the idea of madness and its treatments, but rather a history of madness itself, which is not a natural given but a cultural construct.

According to Foucault, what today is called madness was in the Middle Ages a vague and heterogeneous territory that included the most diverse forms of social and anthropology cal marginalization. What has happened, according to Foucault, is not that we have den tidied a properly medical and psychiatric problem by disentangling it from highly diverse and poorly assorted phenomena. Rather, a medical–psychiatric form of knowledge has gradually emerged by extricating itself from other forms of knowledge, whether tradition al, theological, philosophical, or medical. This new knowledge managed to persuade us of the existence of its object (madness), an object clearly distinguishable from the others and endowed with a kind of essence, be it moral, neurological, or otherwise. Foucault dissociative identity disorder Critiques and Integration of Phenomenology: Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze not believe that psychiatry as a particular form of knowledge identified its specific object by separating it from other objects. Rather, he thought that all forms of knowledge con strutted their objects by carving out, each time according to an equally legitimate or arbi tarry criterion, a specific portion of the infinitely rich tapestry of reality. Medieval knoll edge was perfectly consistent and absolutely objective in its application when it interned beggars together with criminals, visionaries, prostitutes, and people infected with tuber culosis. Equally consistent and objective was nineteenth-century knowledge when it pre served or expunged some of those categories of people and introduced new ones, group ing together, for example, criminals and visionaries but not beggars and tuberculosisstricken people. Again, with equal legitimacy, the criterion of social marginalization was replaced by that of behavioral abnormality, which required also some attention to its sta tistical and demographic measurability, some investigation into its possible histological correlates, and so on.

After his controversial study of madness, Foucault explored other territories. By adopting what he called an “archaeological” and “genealogical” perspective, Foucault addressed somewhat interconnected issues, such as medicine, penal institutions, and sexuality ( Foucault 1988–90 ). In relation to the variegated field of phenomenology and phenomenological psychopathology, at least two consequences of Foucault’s work deserve mention. The first is evidently ethical–political and sounds like an invitation—implicit in Madness and Civilization —to relativize psychiatric knowledge and its claims of objectivity. (p. 91) This applies even to psychiatry’s seemingly more neu Aral, objective, and scientifically up-to-date versions, such as statistical–diagnostic or bio logical–pharmacological ones. It was an invitation to reflect on the fact that often such objectivity concealed unexplored theoretical options, unconscious metaphysical assume sons, and more or less violent and repressive ideological tenets. This is the sense in which Foucault’s work was received and understood by the anti-psychiatry movements. These critical reactions to psychiatry emerged in parallel with Madness and Civilization (and lasted for about two decades) in several European countries, and it was a movement that took different forms, such as those influenced by R. D. Ling in the United Kingdom and Franco Basaglia in Italy. The second consequence, more theoretical and philosophical in nature, is a relativization of the category of the subject, a category that phenomenology cal psychiatry and philosophical phenomenology had often brandished against, respect Lively, the most biologically oriented forms of psychiatry and the most diverse forms of bi logical and historical–social–economic reductionist. What was claimed, in such con frontation, was the irreducibility of experience and subjectivity to their material conj sons and premises. Again, Foucault exhorted his readers to cultivate doubt and to sus Sect that under the actual subjective experience supposedly grounded in an irreducible individuality or in a transcendental subjectivity as identified by a certain tradition of thought, perhaps quite a different reality might be at work, something deeper and more elusive: an inextricable web of social practices, anonymous and pervasive discourses and cultural constructs that combine knowledge and power in accordance with specific rules and specific effects of meaning, truth, and repression. For Foucault, this web is perhaps not believe that psychiatry as a particular form of knowledge identified its specific object by separating it from other objects. Rather, he thought that all forms of knowledge con strutted their objects by carving out, each time according to an equally legitimate or arbi tarry criterion, a specific portion of the infinitely rich tapestry of reality. Medieval knoll edge was perfectly consistent and absolutely objective in its application when it interned beggars together with criminals, visionaries, prostitutes, and people infected with tuber culosis. Equally consistent and objective was nineteenth-century knowledge when it pre served or expunged some of those categories of people and introduced new ones, group ing together, for example, criminals and visionaries but not beggars and tuberculosisstricken people. Again, with equal legitimacy, the criterion of social marginalization was replaced by that of behavioral abnormality, which required also some attention to its sta tistical and demographic measurability, some investigation into its possible histological correlates, and so on.

After his controversial study of madness, Foucault explored other territories. By adopting what he called an “archaeological” and “genealogical” perspective, Foucault addressed somewhat interconnected issues, such as medicine, penal institutions, and sexuality ( Foucault 1988–90 ). In relation to the variegated field of phenomenology and phenomenological psychopathology, at least two consequences of Foucault’s work deserve mention. The first is evidently ethical–political and sounds like an invitation—implicit in Madness and Civilization —to relativize psychiatric knowledge and its claims of objectivity. (p. 91) This applies even to psychiatry’s seemingly more neu Aral, objective, and scientifically up-to-date versions, such as statistical–diagnostic or bio logical–pharmacological ones. It was an invitation to reflect on the fact that often such objectivity concealed unexplored theoretical options, unconscious metaphysical assume sons, and more or less violent and repressive ideological tenets. This is the sense in which Foucault’s work was received and understood by the anti-psychiatry movements. These critical reactions to psychiatry emerged in parallel with Madness and Civilization (and lasted for about two decades) in several European countries, and it was a movement that took different forms, such as those influenced by R. D. Ling in the United Kingdom and Franco Basaglia in Italy. The second consequence, more theoretical and philosophical in nature, is a relativization of the category of the subject, a category that phenomenology cal psychiatry and philosophical phenomenology had often brandished against, respect Lively, the most biologically oriented forms of psychiatry and the most diverse forms of bi logical and historical–social–economic reductionist. What was claimed, in such con frontation, was the irreducibility of experience and subjectivity to their material conj sons and premises. Again, Foucault exhorted his readers to cultivate doubt and to sus Sect that under the actual subjective experience supposedly grounded in an irreducible individuality or in a transcendental subjectivity as identified by a certain tradition of thought, perhaps quite a different reality might be at work, something deeper and more elusive: an inextricable web of social practices, anonymous and pervasive discourses and cultural constructs that combine knowledge and power in accordance with specific rules and specific effects of meaning, truth, and repression. For Foucault, this web is perhaps Critiques and Integration of Phenomenology: Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze the only transcendental dimension that is worth addressing.

Giles Deleuze Giles Deleuze was one of the most important French poststructuralist thinkers. He wrote major works such as Difference and Repetition, The Logic of Sense, and (with Felix Guattari) Anti-Oedipus and A Thousand Plateaus. However, it was in the first of his two famous books dedicated to the cinema, The Movement-Image, which was followed two years later by The Time-Image, that Deleuze engaged more explicitly and more critically with phenomenology. The context for this criticism may seem odd, but in hindsight it was not. If it is true that cinema is a Bergsonian form of art, then the background of Deleuze’s criticism of phenomenology lay precisely in an overall interpretation of the philosophy and culture typical of the twenty eth century. According to Deleuze, the twentieth century began by pointing to a dual path or, better, to a grand theoretical alternative, namely, that between Bergson and Husserl. In these pages, Deleuze clearly and openly opted for Bergson and against Husserl. Phe nomenology and Bergsonism have often been compared or grouped together on the basis of their common attention to experience and their similar attempt to capture experience in its immediate manifestations. In the Movement-Image, however, Deleuze strongly con tasted these two approaches. He argued that while Husserl’s battle cry was that every consciousness is consciousness of something, Bergson’s was that every consciousness is a thing: this was the abyss separating the two positions and their profoundly different treatment of the same problems. Every consciousness is consciousness of (p. 92) some thing: according to this slogan, Husserlian phenomenology emphasized intentionality, to the point where the intentionality of consciousness and its subjective orientation toward its objects was seen as the basis of experience itself. All consciousness is a thing: accord ing to this slogan, Bergsonism emphasized a subjectless experience, whose primary source of meaning dissociative identity disorder not lie in the activity of consciousness; rather, consciousness was seen as simply one of the available, but not mandatory and, even less, fundamental modes of organization of experience.

It is perhaps difficult to recognize Husserl’s and Bergson’s ideas point by point in the slo ans coined by Deleuze. It is certainly easier to identify in the Husserlian slogan a class cal definition of intentionality. It is less easy, however, to identify in the Bergsonian slogan an authentic position actually espoused by Bergson, despite the fact that he often enter Gained similar claims. However, the Deleuzian formula could also be critic Sized from the opposite angle. The sentence that should describe the phenomenological position is literally more accurate, but in fact less faithful to Husserl’s thought. No doubt for Husserl all consciousness is consciousness of something, and therefore is an intention al consciousness. However, the object of intentionality is in fact never external to intel tonality itself: it is never a naturalistically understood object. The polarity is always com pletely intrinsic to the intentional act—always a noematic rather than an objective polar Critiques and Integration of Phenomenology: Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze ty. The Bergsonian slogan coined by Deleuze, on the other hand, is literally less accurate, but (not surprisingly) more in tune with the spirit of Bergson’s philosophy. The idea that consciousness is not consciousness of something, but a thing among other things floating on the surface of experience, means for Bergson that experience is not a ray of light go ing from one place to another, from a subject to an object, but is primarily a non-genera ed dimension deprived of a subject. The immediate experiential evidence is not that a subject is targeting an object, but that experience is simply given: a landscape announces and offers itself, and somehow “is seen,” that is, sees itself through itself. Only at a later time, Bergson believes, this subject-less and object-less experience is constructed as a subjective experience and is restructured and endowed with a perspective: the result is that such perspective begins to be seen as a subject, and the content of the experience begins to count as the object of experience.

Deleuze’s sketch has, if nothing else, the merit of fully clarifying, through his treatment of Bergson, Deleuze’s own position. The battle between Husserl and Bergson is, for Deleuze, one between the strategy of transcendence and the strategy of immanence. The first turns experience into an “exiting from” and a “heading to” something; all the necessary distinctions being made, this is indeed Husserl’s position. The second strategy turns exp rience into a permanent “motion” within a non-transcendable dimension that knows no outside or alterity; in other words, this is a monastic or immanent theory of experience, which refuses to start from dualistic premises and to oppose a subject to an object and consequently to postulate the transcendence and the transcendental as the foundation of the possibility of experience. Deleuze’s thought is therefore characterized by a radical an ti-conscious and anti-transcendental stance. In other words, confronted with the Harte Xian spectrum, Deleuze firmly resorted to a Spinozian option, which in terms of philoso phy of experience involved the idea of an original, perfectly auto-immanent, absolutely anonymous, and totally impersonal experience—something that, one might argue, phe nomenology itself, with not too dissimilar language, had often adumbrated, especially when confronting the more or less hidden legacy of Cartesianism. One might think, in this regard, of Merleau-Monty’s phenomenology of the flesh, Jan Patocka’s phenomenology of movement (p. 93), Michel Henry’s material phenomenology, or Renaud Barbara’s phenomenology of life.

Deleuze’s sketch has, if nothing else, the merit of fully clarifying, through his treatment of Bergson, Deleuze’s own position. The battle between Husserl and Bergson is, for Deleuze, one between the strategy of transcendence and the strategy of immanence. The first turns experience into an “exiting from” and a “heading to” something; all the necessary distinctions being made, this is indeed Husserl’s position. The second strategy turns exp rience into a permanent “motion” within a non-transcendable dimension that knows no outside or alterity; in other words, this is a monastic or immanent theory of experience, which refuses to start from dualistic premises and to oppose a subject to an object and consequently to postulate the transcendence and the transcendental as the foundation of the possibility of experience. Deleuze’s thought is therefore characterized by a radical an ti-conscious and anti-transcendental stance. In other words, confronted with the Harte Xian spectrum, Deleuze firmly resorted to a Spinozian option, which in terms of philoso phy of experience involved the idea of an original, perfectly auto-immanent, absolutely anonymous, and totally impersonal experience—something that, one might argue, phe nomenology itself, with not too dissimilar language, had often adumbrated, especially when confronting the more or less hidden legacy of Cartesianism. One might think, in this regard, of Merleau-Monty’s phenomenology of the flesh, Jan Patocka’s phenomenology of movement (p. 93), Michel Henry’s material phenomenology, or Renaud Barbara’s phenomenology of life.

A text written in the 1970s, Anti-Oedipus represents the most interesting result, but also the most difficult to decipher, of Deleuze’s immanentism. The target of the book, as evident from the title, is the psychoan alytic concept of the Oedipus complex. In the normal development and full resolution of such complex, classic Freudianism and Kleinianism saw the path that ensured the Amer Fence of a subject capable of adapting to social life with its inevitable and necessary dis contents as well as the success of the psychoanalytic treatment. According to this view, this treatment allowed the subject to come to terms with the renunciation of instincts required by society in exchange for protection.

Critiques and Integration of Phenomenology: Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze In the eyes of Deleuze and Guattari, Oedipus appeared as the emblem of an entire tho retinal discourse, according to which the construction of a subject is dependent on its re Enunciation of a part of pleasure and on the replacement of a full, primal, anarchist, and uncontrollable pleasure with a void, a lack, a fundamental resistance on the part of Dexter nal objects. As a consequence, in this view, desire is a relationship entertained with ab Fence or through absence, and the true nature of the desiring subject lies in its tendency to negate its immediate object of desire in order to cut across it and reach for a never ful ly graspable “beyond.” Against all this, Deleuze and Guattari wanted to construct an im anent and positive notion of desire rather than a transcendent and negative one. They saw this as a chance to disentangle psychoanalysis and psychiatry itself from what ap paired to them as an essentially ideological function.

Conclusion Derrida shows that the transcendental is broken, that its powers of constitution are inter mitten, that intermittence is the structure of sense itself. Foucault shows that the ran scendental is a set of apparatuses which give birth to the subject as a subjected subject, that there is no meaning outside of the apparatuses, and that apparatuses are absolutely contingent and meaningless. Deleuze and Guattari show that if Oedipus is a symbol of dis order, the true alternative is nevertheless not the one which opposes order to disorder, but the one which opposes order and disorder on the one side, and the never-ending cre Cation of new couplings of order and disorder on the other side, that is, the metamorphic and fractal movement or event of what they call chaosmos. The three different positions are three different concepts of difference as a sort of non-transcendental structure of the transcendental itself. It is difficult to say whether a non-transcendental phenomenology would still be phenomenology, and this philosophical question is still open. Phenomena logical psychiatry, or phenomenological psychopathology, could nevertheless draw some useful insights and instruments from this ongoing debate: e.g. a more subtle transcended talism; a more continuous view of the range of psychopathological experiences; a more exact comprehension of the different temporal and spatial structures of psychopathology cal worlds as the internal possibilities and infinitesimal variations of the transcendental, much more than the crisis or fracture of its functioning; and a more critical way of think ing the structure of institutions, the epistemology of their therapeutical vocation, the ar chaeology of the subjectivity, or the (p. 94) normativity they assume as a directive prince ple of the treatments they dispense. In brief, at the very convergence between this kind of subtle transcendentalism and this sort of anti-institutional but not anti-psychiatric psych try, what we could find is an idea of treatment which is not the route from disease to health but from vulnerability to singularity. PAGE_BREAK Critiques and Integration of Phenomenology: Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze Foucault, M.. Abnormal. Lectures at the Collège de France, trans. G. Burchell. New York: Picador. Freud, S.. Civilization and its Discontents, trans. J. Strachey. New York: Norton and Co. Henry, M.. The Essence of Manifestation, trans. G. Etzkorn. Den Hag: Ni jhoff.

(p. 95) Husserl, E.. For the Phenomenology of Inner Consciousness of Time, trans. J. B. Rough. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Merleau-Monty, M.. The Visible and the Invisible, trans. A. Lings. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Patocka, J.. Body, Community, Language, World, trans. E. Kodak. Chicago: Open Court.

Federico Leon Universityà deli Saudi di Milan, Dipartimento di Filosofia, Milan, Italy (p. 95) Husserl, E.. For the Phenomenology of Inner Consciousness of Time, trans. J. B. Rough. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Merleau-Monty, M.. The Visible and the Invisible, trans. A. Lings. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Patocka, J.. Body, Community, Language, World, trans. E. Kodak. Chicago: Open Court.

Federico Leon Universityà deli Saudi di Milan, Dipartimento di Filosofia, Milan, Italy Karl Jasper # Karl Jasper Matthias Bormuth The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter discusses the psychopathological ideas of Karl Jasper, one of the founding fathers of phenomenological thinking. Jasper always admired researchers who used the means of natural sciences in psychiatry, but he relied more on the psychology of under standing conceptualized and exercised in the humanities (“Geisteswissenschaften”) by Wilhelm Dilthey, Max Weber, and Reorg Simmer. The chapter first provides an overview of Jasper’s intellectual biography as a psychiatrist before analyzing his methodological horizons of understanding psychology. It then examines what philosophical consider sons motivated Jasper to draw the “limits of understanding” closer and stricter in the last edition of his book General Psychopathology, first published in 1913. It suggests that these limits can be determined as an existential application of Emmanuel Kant’s idea and antinomy of freedom. The chapter concludes with an assessment of Jasper’s claim that existence-philosophical self-reflection constitutes a necessary supplement to psychothera py.

Keywords: psychopathology, Karl Jasper, General Psychopathology, psychiatry, psychology of understanding, Wil helm Dilthey, Emmanuel Kant, freedom, self-reflection, psychotherapy # Introduction KARL Jasper became one of the founding fathers of phenomenological thinking by publishing his General Psychopathology in 1913. International conferences around the globe celebrated the 100th anniversary of his “psychiatric opus magnum.” One esteemed his leading purpose: “to bring order into the chaos of abnormal psychic phenomena by rigorous description, definition, and classification, and to empower psych try with a valid and reliable method to assess and make sense of abnormal human sub 1 jectivity.”

Although Jasper’s method of understanding differs greatly from those who followed strictly Edmund Husserl’s insights, Jasper shared the ambition to understand the inner Karl Jasper world of the patient and its dynamics with colleagues like Ludwig Binswanger at that time. But he relied more on the psychology of understanding conceptualized and Lexer Vised in the humanities (“Geisteswissenschaften”) by Wilhelm Dilthey, Max Weber, and Reorg Simmer.

In later editions of his book Jasper restricted his concept of understanding to pure de scriptions and observed genealogical speculations with great doubts pointing at vague psychological or philosophical premises. Jasper called these leading ideas “psychomyths” primarily with Freud and his school in mind. Moreover he criticized all biological attempts as “brain-myth” which pretended to be able to solve the riddle of psychiatric ill Fesses.

Jasper’s strict critique of speculative theories in the field of psychiatry arose from his in creasingly widespread philosophical horizon. The fourth and last edition of his General Psychopathology, which was written during the Second World War when Jasper had been withdrawn from public life in Nazi Germany and was not allowed to publish, philosophy ally contained a completely new section built up on philosophical grounds which intend ed to reflect on “The Human Being as a Whole.” Jasper wrote about this part of the book and its “fundamental philosophical questions”: “It is no longer part of the field of psy 2 chopathological science as such but has a general relevance.”

This chapter begins by sketching the biographical and intellectual background without which it would not have been possible for Jasper to give birth to his famous concept of (p. 97) understanding. Then the focus will be more closely directed on its methodological frame. The chapter finishes by directing attention to the question of what philosophical considerations motivated Jasper to draw the “limits of understanding” more closely and strictly in the last, and nowadays internationally read, edition of the General Psy chopathology. The thesis is that these limits can be determined as an existential applica son of Kant’s idea and antinomy of freedom.

The Intellectual Biography of Jasper as a Psy # chiatrist The fact that Jasper was able to write his psychiatric classic before turning thirty has two more reasons than his great talent to shed methodological lights on the psychopath logical appearances. First his personal situation and secondly his favorable circus stances in which he found himself at the Psychiatric and Neurological Clinic of Heidel berg helped him to accomplish this lucid overview of the material.

Due to a severe, chronic lung disease the young assistant was relieved from his usual clinical duties. This meant that Jasper could spend much more time on research than his colleagues, exploring individual patients and studying psychiatric literature. These conj sons made it possible to work as an engaged observer in the sciences. The young psych Karl Jasper artist had time enough to get to know the phenomena empirically and a sufficient amount of hours to reflect on them in the horizon of historic psychiatric literature.

His elder and more experienced colleagues Karl Wilmanns and Hans W. Gruhle intro Educed him into their psychology of understanding, while Franz Nissl, the head of the Olin ic, exercised biological psychiatry at a high level, working with Aloes Alzheimer on the his tological exploration of dementia. Therefore both ways of approaching psychiatric dis eases—the psychological understanding and the biological explanation—were represent ed prominently at that time in Heidelberg. In his Philosophical Autobiography Jasper summed up the methodological conviction that each way had a limited right on its own: “Whenever (man) becomes known, something of his appearance becomes known, not he himself. Every knowledge of man as a whole proves to be a deception which arises from the fact that one way of inquiry is elevated to the rank of being the only one, one method 3 is made a universal one.”

Although Jasper always admired researchers who made use of the natural sciences in psychiatry his personal affinity was, from early on, directed toward the method of psycho logical understanding. Already his doctoral thesis on “Eifersuchtswahn,” written in 1909, was influenced by the desire to describe psychologically certain psychopathological phe novena and to contextualize them culturally as far as possible. In 1912 Jasper published a methodological paper, the title of which underlined the significance of Edmund 4 Husserl. But a close reading of “The Phenomenological Approach in Psychopathology,” 5 which, in 1968, was the only one of Jasper’s early papers to be translated into English, reveals clearly (p. 98) that already at this early stage of his intellectual becoming, Jasper dissociative identity disorder not belong to the phenomenological school as such. In his view it could only provide a descriptive knowledge of the symptomatology of a patient. Therefore Jasper withdrew from the Husserlian core of the method writing with respect and distance in his recollect son: “As method I adopted Husserl’s phenomenology, which, in its beginnings, he called descriptive psychology; I retained it although I rejected its further development to insight 6 into essences (Wesensschau).”

The possibility of exploring the human subjectivity even in its pathological appearances was, at its core, a scientific claim for which Jasper never had great sympathy. Looking back on such an ambition he wrote critically: “Never can the balance, so to speak, be struck by scientific means. Every sick person is, like any other person, inexhaustible. Nev er does knowledge reach a point where the personality with its hidden mysteriousness cannot at least be sense—be it even as mere possibility, as still reflected in wondrous left 7 overs (of the original personality).”

Much more than to Husserl’s phenomenology, Jasper was attached to the cultural sci Fences which were discussed in the circle that existed in Heidelberg around Max Weber. His colleague and friend Hans Gruhle had paved the way to Max Weber in 1909 and since then Jasper had exchanged thoughts with the historian, economist, and founder of Loci logy. After the premature death of his intellectual hero, in 1920 Jasper told the Aston shed academic world: Karl Jasper If Max Weber was a philosopher, perhaps he was the only philosopher of our times and was a philosopher in a sense in which no one else could be termed as such to 8 day.

Thus it hardly comes as a surprise that in 1949, when Jasper was at the zenith of public recognition as a philosopher and psychiatrist, he should look back and acknowledge the decisive role which Max Weber had played for him throughout his lifetime as a scientist and philosopher: As he writes, “I am indebted to Max Weber not only for my Psy chopathology of young years, but also for providing me with the means to formulate my 9 philosophy.”

Max Weber is connected with the Neokantian school of thinkers around 1900 whose cen ter was—at least for some time—Heidelberg. Wilhelm Windelband and Heinrich Rickert, both colleagues of Weber, were leading figures in the methodological discussion which was being carried on in the humanities (“Geisteswissenschaften”) around 1900. The ap roach of the natural sciences was determined as a “nomothetic” and the own one was called “ideographic.” This Neokantian dichotomy became decisive for Jasper. He was convinced that natural events can only be explained externally with the help of logical regularities which have been achieved by using inductive reasoning, whereas inner mean ing-making processes can only be grasped by individual empathy. So he took up the pop lar polarization of “objective causal connections” on “explaining” (“Erklären”) and “un 10 derstanding of psychic events ‘from within’ as ‘understanding’ (‘Verstehen’).”

This short overview of the main influences on the early Jasper would not be complete without a word concerning the important role of Sigmund Freud. His psychoanalytic ap roach toward the inner world was widely discussed among his clinical colleagues and in the Weber circle. Heidelberg was one of the few places next to Munich and Zurich where the (p. 99) academic world and some psychiatrists were open to the provocative ideas on the genealogy of diverse psychic illnesses. Psychoanalysis was practiced by the assistants by analyzing each other and sometimes certain patients. In the first edition of his General Psychopathology Jasper called Freud one of the most outstanding psychologists next to the philosophers Søren Kierkegaard and especially Friedrich Nietzsche. The second edi son of 1920 already takes a more critical position, saying that Freud demonstrated a pe culiar lack of intellect in his understanding ascription. Now any praise of his outstanding intellectual had vanished and Jasper states clearly that Freud cannot match the achieve Bents of those two great searchers and confessors of the human self.

This early affinity toward the thoughts of Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, whom Jasper had already studied in his psychiatric years, can be taken as a sign of his calling as a philoso fer. Encouraged by his illness which dissociative identity disorder not allow him to take up a permanent position in psychiatry, Jasper decided after five successful years to become a philosopher. Jasper described enthusiastically his lifelong passion for the life of the mind in his autobiogra phy: “From early youth on I had been philosophizing. Actually I had taken up medicine 11 and psychopathology from philosophical motives.”

Karl Jasper He published his Psychology of Worldviews in 1919, an interdisciplinary work between psychology and philosophy which was pivotal in the decision to invite Jasper to take up a chair of philosophy at Heidelberg University in 1922. The book became the “earliest writ ing in the later so-called modern Existentialism” with all the “fundamental questions,” as Jasper recollected over three decades later, “about the world, what it is for man; about the situation of man and about his ultimate situations (“Grenzsituation”) from which there is no escape (death, suffering, chance, guilt, struggle); about time and the multidimen ion nature of its meaning; about the movement of freedom in the process of creating 12 one’s self.” The challenge of human freedom became the leading idea of Jasper’s filo sophical work and also for the last revision of the General Psychopathology, as we will see below.

Jasper’s Methodological Horizons of Under # standing Psychology In his formative years as a psychiatrist Jasper provided a well-received distinction for the phenomenological method of understanding. He introduced three forms of under standing; discerning between “static,” “rational,” and “genetic” understanding. During the hermeneutic process the first two forms were feeding the third so that at the end a di agnostical judgment could be possible. First the psychopathologist combines the “ratio nal” and “static” approach of isolated psychic phenomena, then he constitutes “genetical ly” associative understanding and reaches finally a classification of symptoms according to ideotypical entities. In this Weberian approach one can only offer “ideotypical conned sons,” making one’s findings only “inherently evident” or “more or less understandable,” for which reason the method of understanding cannot compete with the explanatory disc lines.

(p. 100) The static and rational ways of understanding are necessary elements in creating a genetic synthesis of the psychopathological phenomena. Without doubt, Nietzsche’s hermeneutics of unconscious feelings, as developed in his Genealogy of Morals, was a de cisive inspiration for Jasper. His General Psychopathology reflects on the evidence Diet zsche gave of the genealogy of Jewish-Christian values by focusing on the unconscious re sentiments against their powerful enemies and oppressors. Probably Max Weber’s and William James’s reception of Nietzsche’s genealogical claim inspired Jasper’s certain openness. Thereby his beginning was connected to Freud’s since the founder of psycho analysis counted among Nietzsche’s earliest readers while studying medicine in Vienna more than three decades before.

While Jasper was initially very open to genealogical suggestions, in psychiatry, his stu dent Kurt Schneider viewed Nietzsche very critically. In his philosophical dissertation— written with Max Schemer in Cologne—Schneider rejected the genealogical end of under standing as proclaimed in the typos of resentment and proclaimed the psychological ind 13 pendence of the values of love, empathy, and justice instead.

Karl Jasper But besides this reception of Nietzsche Jasper dissociative identity disorder not follow his teacher Weber in the de sire to articulate clear suggestions and make etiological claims. He dissociative identity disorder not employ the concept of the “ideotype” to make any definite statements as Weber had done in the polemically discussed The Protestant Ethics and the “Spirit” of Capitalism. Jasper’s idea of genealogical evidence remained rather vague. The reason was his great, never outspo ken, affinity with Wilhelm Dilthey’s concept of empathy (“Einfühlung”) which provided more literary views on inner dynamics. Jasper’s pathographical studies on van Gosh and especially the poet Hölderlin can be seen as examples of this certain vagueness and the 14 direct reception of Dilthey’s essayistic interpretations. Therefore Jasper spoke of the art of psychological understanding, which allowed an “unprejudiced, direct comprehend ion of psychic events” and the “irreducible quality of psychic phenomena.” As he con tends, by means of “comparison, repetition, verification of the results of empathy,” the “direct comprehension of expression phenomena” could almost reach the empiric-object 15 Dive status of natural sciences.

Jasper argues that the obtainable degree of psychological evidence would depend on the interpreter’s subjective ability to understand and the quality of the given material. There fore he exercised mostly a methodological dualism which mirrored Dilthey’s famous po larization between causally compelling, generally valid “science” and the very subjective 16 “adeptness and art” of understanding. As Jasper argues, the natural scientific conned sons of psychiatry can be theorized, whereas psychological moments of understanding cannot be grasped systematically and have to be described in the literary-essayistic forms 17 of depiction. According to this, the “instinctive adeptness” of the interpreter constitutes 18 a vague tool of insight prone to error. In his eyes, psychological hermeneutics was only capable of rudimentarily sounding out and connecting unconscious motivations without ever reaching the unfathomable depths of the sea of unconsciousness.

One can resume Jasper’s limited concept of understanding: The deeper causes of patio genesis were not to discern by psychological and hermeneutical means. He illustrated his notion from early on by a model of disease in which the symptoms correspond to the lay ers of an onion. The innermost ones stand for the causes of psychic disorder and (p. 101) are, pathogenetically speaking, the decisive ones, even if the disease phenomena can be influenced pathoplastically by biographic experience of the outer layers. Jasper sketches the pathogenetic core as constituting “extra conscious dispositions, predispositions, psy 19 chic constitutions and extra-conscious-mechanisms,” which, as an “extremely complicit ed biological process,” eludes our knowledge “to an immeasurable degree,” thus permit 20 ting no direct correlations between changes in brain activity and psychic disorders.

When Jasper later developed his existence philosophy he insisted even more strongly on the limits of understanding. Having been forced to retire from his philosophical chair due to his Jewish wife Gertrude, he took the opportunity to revise the General Psychopathology. The existential root of his thinking deepened in this personal border sit Cation. And the idea of undetermined freedom in circumstances which seem to determine man became entirely the beacon of his thoughts.

Karl Jasper As we will see, this focus on the existential possibilities became an important reason why, in the last edition of his book, Jasper postulated even more strongly the limits of under standing. Not only biological facts but also cultural decisions limit our ability to under stand the other and our wish to enlighten the deepest grounds of our convictions, deeds, failings, and psychopathologies. This created a broad gap between Jasper and all other phenomenological, anthropological, psychoanalytical, and psychosomatic attempts of ge netic understanding.

Self-Reflection and Phenomenological Psychic # try Jasper’s ambition of limiting the possible achievements of understanding is strongly cor related with his growing philosophical enthusiasm and profile. The early affinity with Dilthey’s idea of the individual incommensurability which lies in the unfathomable union scions affords turned more and more into the concept of freedom of self-determination. Thereby the perspective of autonomous dynamics—which cannot be determined scientific ally—stands in its own right, confronted with the duty to be as well aware of all rational ly recognizable causes of biological, social, and psychological kind. Jasper legitimizes the existential perspective by introducing Kant’s critical thoughts on the antinomy of free 21 dom. The postulate of freedom breaks up the original polarization between understand ing and explaining psychiatric phenomena. Jasper goes beyond Dilthey’s concept.

Therefore only the last edition of his General Psychopathology refers to the philosophical language of critical idealism which can be seen in his exemplary claim: “So far as the hu man being is empirically explorable as an object of knowledge he is unfree. But in so far as we ourselves experience, act and investigate we are free in our own self-certainty and 22 hence more than we can ever discover.” For Jasper, existence-philosophical self-reflex son constitutes a necessary supplement to psychotherapy, which in his eyes no longer be longs (p. 102) in any way to the realm of psychiatry. The existential hermeneutics in the Kantian horizon is the decisive means in order to enlighten the individual’s personality even with its pathological aspects.

For the Kantian philosopher of existence, Freud, Adler, and Jung are all deeply guilty of being ideological (“weltanschaulich”) schools of inner knowledge. One reads in his autobi graphical sketch: “For the totality of man lies way beyond any conceivable objectifiabili ty. He is incompletable both as a being-for-himself and as an object of cognition. He re mains, so to speak, ‘open’. Man is always more than what he knows, or can know, about 23 himself.”

The consequences of this attitude can be observed in Jasper’s polemical criticism on Vik tor von Wei'säOcker and Alexander Mitscherlich, exercised in Heidelberg in the first years after the Second World War. The two were establishing together and very successfully a psychosomatic and psychoanalytical institute. Without too much of a self-critical attitude Karl Jasper they claimed to be able to help the patients to find the inner meaning of life which lays 24 hidden in the psychic crisis.

Jasper’s critique of the phenomenological approach of the so-called “Daseinsanalyse” is more benevolent; at least he recognizes it in the General Psychopathology as an “intellect Dual movement” in the psychiatric world. In contrast to the main spokespersons of his time, Victor von Gebsattel and Ludwig Binswanger, who are now seen as the founding fa hers of “anthropological psychiatry,” Jasper raises the fundamental objection that their philosophical ambition in the name of psychiatry goes too far: “The totality of human life 25 and its ultimate origin cannot be the object of any scientific research.” He appreciates their descriptive powers but dismisses their etiological explanations. As Jasper does not recognize any connection between etiological and psychological hermeneutics, he iron ally designates the psychologico-philosophical interpretations offered by the represent Dives of the “Daseinsanalyse” as attempts at understanding which create an unspecifically human climate without doing any real damage. One can appreciate the irony in the sen Fence: “Interpretations are soothing yet interpretations are nothing but 26 interpretations.”

In summary then: Whenever it comes to final questions of life conduct which are connect ed to psychopathological phenomena the self-critical physician should elucidate the sub jective character of his judgment. Those philosophical aspects of psychotherapy cannot be legitimized theoretically or rationally. So the communication between the doctor and patient might become an existential one in the sense depending on the willingness of both to think beyond the limits of scientific knowledge. Jasper writes: “One questions and gropes one freedom to another within the concreteness of the actual situation, taking no responsibility for the other nor making any abstract demands.... Doctor and patient are both human beings and as such fellow-travelers in destiny. The doctor is not a pure tech 27 nician nor pure authority, but existence for its own sake....”

Bibliography Bormuth M.. Life Conduct in Modern Times. New York: Stringer.

Bormuth M.. “On Psychodynamics of Personal-judgments—Nietzsche’s Theory of Resentment and its Reception by Karl Jasper and Kurt Schneider.” Alta Neuropsychiatri ca 21 (Suppl 2): 10–14.

Bormuth M. (2013a). “Psychopathology in the Modern Age. Karl Jasper Reads HöOder lin.” In T. Fuchs, T. Beyer, and C. Mundt (eating disorders.), Karl Jasper ́ Philosophy and Psy chopathology, pp. 3–17. New York: Stringer.

Bormuth M. (2013b). “Karl Jasper the Pathographer.” In G. Stanghellini and T. Fuchs (eating disorders.), One Century of Karl Jasper ́ General Psychopathology, pp. 133–149. Oxford: Ox ford University Press.

Karl Jasper Bormuth M. (2013c). “Freedom and Mystery: An Intellectual History of Jasper’ General Psychopathology.” Psychopathology. International Journal of Descriptive and Experiment tal Psychopathology, Phenomenology and Psychiatric Diagnosis 46: 281–289.

Jasper K.. “Die phänomenologische Forschungsrichtung in der Psychopatholo gie.” Zeitschrift für die gesamte Psychiatric und Neurologie 9: 391–408 (later in Gesam mete Schriften zur Psychopathologie. Heidelberg: Stringer 1963, pp. 314–328).

Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. Berlin: Stringer.

Jasper K.. “Philosophical Autobiography.” In P. A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy of Karl Jasper, pp. 1–94. New York: Tudor Publishing Company.

Jasper K.. “The Phenomenological Approach in Psychopathology.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 114: 1313–1325.

Jasper K.. Max Weber. Gesammelte Schriften, ed. Hans Saner. München: Piper.

Jasper K.. General Psychopathology, trans. from the German J. Hoeing and M. W. Hamilton (with a new Foreword by P. R. McHugh). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Jasper K.. “Letter to Willy Hellpach, April 22, 1949.” In K. Jasper, Korresponden zen Psychiatric—Medizin—Naturwissenschaften, ed. M. Bormuth and D. v. Engelhardt. Göttingen: Wallstein Publishing House.

Stanghellini G. and Fuchs T.. “Editors’ Introduction.” In G. Stanghellini and T. Fuchs (eating disorders.), One Century of Karl Jasper ́ General Psychopathology, pp. xiii–xxviii. Ox ford: Oxford University Press.

Notes:

1 ( ) Cf. Stanghellini and Fuchs (2013: xiii).

2 ( ) Jasper (2013: 747–822, 747).

3 ( ) Jasper (1957: 20f.).

4 ( ) Jasper (1912: 391–408), later in (1963: 314–328).

5 ( ) Jasper (1968: 1313–1325).

6 ( ) Jasper (1957: 18).

7 ( ) Jasper (1957: 21).

8 ( ) Jasper (1988: S. 32).

9 ( ) Jasper (2016: 190).

Karl Jasper 10 ( ) Jasper (2013: 14), quoted from Jasper (1998: 28). 11 ( ) Jasper (1957: 24). 12 ( ) Jasper (1957: 29). 13 ( ) More details are given in Bormuth. 14 ( ) See Bormuth (2013a, 2013b). 15 ( ) Jasper (1988: 318f.). 16 ( ) Jasper (1913: S. 2). 17 ( ) Jasper Gesammelte Schriften zur Psychopathologie 18 ( ) Jasper (1913: 2). 19 ( ) Jasper (1913: 49). 20 ( ) Jasper (1913: 192). 21 ( ) See Bormuth (2013c). 22 ( ) Jasper (1998: 754f.). 23 ( ) Jasper (1957: 19). 24 ( ) choanalytic Psychosomatic 1949–1953” 25 ( ) Jasper (1998: 543). 26 ( ) Jasper (1998: 546). 27 ( ) Jasper (1998: 798f.).

Matthias Bormuth Institute für Philosophic, Carl von Ossietzky Universityät (1963: 336).

Bormuth focuses on the controversy especially in the chapter “Critique of Psy.

Eugène Minkowski # Eugène Minkowski Annick Urfer-Paras The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter discusses the psychopathological ideas of Eugène Minkowski, a French psy chiatrist of Jewish Polish origin who is regarded as a dominant figure in phenomenology cal psychiatry due to his translation of theoretical and abstract philosophical notions into ordinary clinical work. After a brief biography, the chapter considers Minkowski’s psy chopathological orientation, citing some of the influential figures in his life and work in Eluding Henri Bergson and Max Schemer. It then examines Minkowski’s notion of schizo phrenia and what he refers to as vital contact with reality, which he describes as a basic mode of human presence in the world. It also looks at two forms of autism proposed by Minkowski, along with one of his most original concepts known as trouble générater, or generative (generating) disorder. The chapter concludes with an assessment of the con temporary relevance of Minkowski’s ideas.

Keywords: psychopathology, Eugène Minkowski, generative disorder, phenomenological psychiatry, Henri Berg son, Max Schemer, schizophrenia, vital contact with reality, autism, trouble générater # Biography EUGÈNE Minkowski was born in a Polish Jewish family in Warsaw. He began his studies in medicine in Poland, but finished them, for political reasons, in Germany. He obtained the Russian equivalent of an MD and emigrated before the First World War to France where he felt at home. Minkowski trained as a resident in Burghølzli under the su prevision of Eugene Bleuler. He volunteered with the French army during the First World War. After the war, he worked for several years as a clinical psychiatrist in a public hosp tal as a resident until he became Chief Psychiatrist at the Saint-Anne Hospital in Paris. He never achieved an academic position. He was professionally active with many important publications and participated in international conferences. In 1925, he co-founded a psy chopathological journal, L’Evolution Psychiatrique. During the Nazi occupation of Paris, he refused for ethical reasons to wear the Star of David and decided not to flee the city.

Eugène Minkowski He stayed in Paris with his family and helped other colleagues and patients in difficulties.

Minkowski published several important articles and four books: La Schizophrénie, Le temps vécu, Hers une cosmologies, and Traité de psychopathologie. Only the second of these books has been translated into English under the title Lived Time. However, he was introduced to Anglophone psychiatry in the 1960s by R. D. Ling and later by Cutting. It is only in the last twenty-five years that interest in Minkowski’s work has gained momentum in France, leading to many new editions of his published work. He has also found a place in a recent book about phenomenological psychiatry.

Psychopathological Orientation Minkowski was always attracted by philosophy and his reading of Henri Bergson, esp sally Essie sur les données immédiates de la conscience (Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness ). This work had a profound impact on (p. 105) his view of consciousness and mental disorders. Another influential figure was the phenomenologist Max Schemer, especially his book on the nature of sympathy. Minkowski’s psychiatric interest was formed by Bleuler’s concept of schizophrenia and especially his conception of autism. In fact, Minkowski introduced Bleuler’s nosological concepts of schizophrenia into French psychiatry. However, Minkowski elaborated Bleuler’s intuition in a highly original phenomenological manner, pointing to disorders of the structure of consciousness. Without exaggeration, Minkowski must be considered a dominant figure in phenomenological psychiatry due to his success of translating theoretical and abstract philosophical notions into ordinary clinical work. He was not attracted to psychoanalysis because of its exclusive focus on mental content. Rather, his emphasis was on the structure of consciousness underlying manifest symptom matology. He was skeptical about the anatomy-clinical (biological) model of mental ill Bess, pointing out our inability to grasp a transition from organic changes to the richness of psychopathological manifestation.

The Notion of Schizophrenia Minkowski considers schizophrenia to be a spectrum disorder (syndrome), which includes milder forms of schizoïdia (corresponding to the current diagnosis schizotypal disorder) as the most basic constitutionally determined condition. Schizophrenia as a psychosis on ly emerges due to noxious developmental influences and upon the vulnerability of schizoï dia (Minkowski 1927: 51). Minkowski thus anticipated the more contemporary diathesisstress model of schizophrenia. Following Bleuler and Kretschmer, he subscribed to a view of two basic existential orientations of human personality, schizoïdia and syntonia, which are implicated in the articulation of psychosis. Schizoïdia is a dimension of interpersonal withdrawal, solitude, and a tendency to indulge private cognition. On the other hand, Eugène Minkowski syntonia is an extroverted world-oriented sociable attitude. Schizophrenia is character zed by the domination of the schizoid dimension. Bipolar disorder on the other hand is typically a disorder with clear syntonic features. In other words, Minkowski, in contrast to many other researchers, considered bipolar illness not only in terms of disorders of tem orality, but also in terms of interpersonal relatedness. The combination of these two di Pensions may contribute to the formation of a mixed and atypical clinical picture.

The Vital Contact with Reality A basic mode of human presence in the world is referred to by Minkowski as vital contact with reality, designating “a certain mode of relatedness between a person and her inner and outer ambient world” ( Urfer 2001: 282) and harmonious attunement to the dynamo ally changing world. It is not a mental faculty or a physiological function. It is an mime date attunement and resonance with the world and with others. It is a sense of signify Dance, relevance, proportion, and adequacy. It resembles Blankenburg’s notion of com mon sense (p. 106) and Janet’s function of reality. In cur rent psychopathology, it is considered to be based on pre-reflective, automatic bounds be tween the individual, the world, and the others. In a phenomenological sense, it is based on passive syntheses of operative intentionality. Vital contact with reality is a structural-dynamic feature of consciousness and an expression of the so-called Élan vital, a term borrowed from Bergson. There is no adequate transl son of élan vital into English. It may be described as an intrinsic openness to the world, an energetic vital impulse throwing us outside ourselves, adapted to the ambient besom ing (devenir ) yet at the same time anchored in our inner self. It is not a question of phys cal relatedness, but spiritual lived synchrony with the situation and other people. There is here a remarkable resemblance with Binswanger’s use of Heidegger’s notion of Casein where the terms self and world are not independent but are always unified in a single whole. Minkowski considered that Visor Hers of élan vital was the core structural feature of schizophrenia.

Autism As is well known, Bleuler defined schizophrenic autism as a withdrawal from the external world into the private realm of fantasy. While agreeing with the central role of autism in the clinical picture of schizophrenia, Minkowski modified the concept in a radical way. Autism is not primarily a withdrawal, but rather a deficiency in the vital contact with reality, leading to ideas, expressions, and behaviors that are some how inadequate to their context. It is characterized by impoverished interpersonal res probity of contact, excessive tendencies to spatialize and objectify phenomena that are not spatial, and an arrest of existential temporality, which manifests by diminishing the guiding role of the future. Second, autism is not, on Minkowski’s account, invariably marked by a rich life of fantasy, and Minkowski distinguished between “poor (pure) autism” characterized by poverty of ideation and emotion and “rich autism” with well-de Eugène Minkowski eloped delusional ideas. A typical instance of the poor autism is given in the following vi gnette: There is immobility around me. Things present themselves in a disconnected way... they are understood rather than experienced. They are like pantomimes performed around me, but which I am not able to join, I stay outside... Every thing around me is motionless and congealed... I see the future only as a repeti son of the past; there is no flow between me and the world. I can no longer give myself away to the world.

(Minkowski 1927: 99–100, quoted in Urfer 2001: 283)

This division of two forms of autism illustrates Minkowski’s claim that in mental illness we need to distinguish between a disorder of structure and a disorder of content (Video-af fictive factors). Poor autism exemplifies the structural change in the vital contact with re laity. In rich autism, the Effective factors play perhaps a compensatory role and con tribute to the richness of positive symptomatology. The notion of phenomenological com Sensation is crucial here: “the individual tries to fill up the lacuna which is emerging in him by seizing the possibilities which he still possess. In this way, he tries to preserve his human existence” (Lantern-Laura, quoted in Ranger 1999: 33). Phenomenological com Sensation is not an instance of coping, that is, it is not just a cognitive attitude, but also a more global existential (p. 107) endeavor. The notion of phenomenological compensation is associated with Minkowski’s general view of the processes of mental causation. Autism, as Minkowski uses the term, “is an anthropological notion that describes nothing less than the entire human person. In ‘a progressive extinction of life,’ certain schizophrenic patients complain of not being able to feel. The patient is ‘in contradiction with the flow and dynamism of life,’ and this contradiction is manifest in a sentiment of emptiness, in a disaggregation of personality, and in the predominance of static, immobilized elements” ( Urfer 2001: 284). The clinical picture of autism comprises the lack of vital contact with reality with an ensuing distortion of behavior, thinking, and interpersonal re Cation, and is the expression of the attempt of phenomenological compensation. These are the so-called autistic attitudes, which comprise morbid rationalism, geometrism, and mor bid regrets. It is an attitude comprising an effort to submit some or all aspects of life under schematic and often algorithmic rules, typically associated with fo cus on irrelevant details, neglect of proportion, and deviating from a common sense Patti Dude. The patient may fall victim to constant ruminations, which are however always egosyntonic. On the surface, such patients may resemble obsessional patients, but the latter rarely go beyond the bounds of common sense.

To illustrate this critical distinction, Minkowski presented a patient at the age of sixteen who becomes preoccupied with all sorts of constructions. He worries about the solidity of his school and thinks that all the buildings are held up only thanks to the terrestrial at traction. He then becomes obsessed by the concept of symmetry, particularly for his body. He strives for a perfect body symmetry, taking up certain positions in front of the mirror and asking himself if the human body does not come down only to symmetry. Eventually, Eugène Minkowski his entire reasoning, thinking, and speech are nothing more than geometry and construe son, until this patient ends up by saying “The plan is my whole life,” “I will absolutely not upset my plan I’d rather upset my life than the plan” ( Minkowski 1927: 116–119).

Morbid regret consists in a tendency toward repetitive and stereotypic complaining about events, situations, and personal features in the past and present. Such complaints may superficially resemble depressive features, but upon closer inspection they appear empty of Effective charge, are stereotypic, and perhaps point to an inability to temporalize and access one’s own feelings and thoughts. Minkowski coins the notion “travel without goal” to describe autistic activities that are completely out of bounds with what will normally be expected in a situation. This concept corresponds closely to Conrad’s notion of “crazy ac son”: “A patient decides to protest against the death sentence of two American anarchists. He writes a letter in his own name, unknown though he is to the world, and decides to deliver it personally to the American ambassador himself. He is sur poised when he is firmly conducted to the Police Station and fined” ( Minkowski 1927: 156; translation by the author).

Trouble Générater Autism or lack of contact with reality is, according to Minkowski, a generative disorder of schizophrenia. Trouble générater, that is, generative (generating) disorder, is one of Minkowski’s most original concepts, constituting one of his most significant contributions to contemporary psychiatry. Generative disorder is a pattern of change in the fundamental structure of personality (in the contemporary sense of the term (p. 108) subjectivity), for example, selfhood, spatiality, temporality, and relatedness to the world. These structural changes influence the formation of psychopathological manifestations and single symptoms. It is not a disturbance of an isolated cognitive fun son or mental faculty, but rather a global affection of our presence in the world.

One can say that psychopathological manifestations or symptoms are incarnations of the trouble générater. The causal relation between the trouble générater, on the one hand, and the symptomatic manifestation, on the other, should not be articulated in terms of physiological or mechanistic terms. Rather these relations are of mental or psychological nature, comprising meaning, motivation, entailment, and implication. As already men toned, all psychopathological manifestations have a formal structure and a psychological content. The generative disorder influences the structural aspect of the symptom, where as contextual Video-Effective factors influence the content of the symptoms. Another as Sect of the trouble générater is the epistemological implication. The clinical picture that the patient presents is a certain gestalt or prototype entailed by the trouble générater. In other words, the diagnosis of schizophrenia cannot be reduced to an additive enumera son of single symptoms, but depends on the perception of this global gestalt and its structural modification: Eugène Minkowski The hypochondriac preoccupations of an anxious patient and similar ideas of a schizophrenic patient are different in their nature because the mental states are of a different nature; we do not even dare to say that they are very preoccupied by their health. There is superficial resemblance between the Video-verbal expressions of these two “troubles générateurs,” which however have nothing in common. It is the same principle when looking for megalomaniac ideas in a schizophrenic pa taint and a general paralytic or true obsession in a neurotic and pseudo-obsession in a schizophrenic patient.

(Minkowski 1997: 96–97; translation by the author)

In appreciating the way of being of the patients, we cannot be satisfied by describing and listing the symptoms that the patients present. Rather, we have to engage our entire per Tonality to confront it with the particular pattern that comes out of the patient’s entire re action (Minkowski 1933: 65). In Minkowski’s view, the diagnostic process is not just a third-person observation, but crucially involves a second-person dimension in which the subjectivity of the patient and the subjectivity of the psychiatrist are in an intimate Bela son: Sitting face to face with my patient, I am meticulously writing down his utter Dances, and then suddenly one of his sentences illuminates everything with a par titular clarity, and I have a feeling of having seized a complex living whole, of hav ing grasped the “trouble générater”, which now appears as the touchstone of the whole clinical picture. Here we can speak of an example of Bergsonian intuition.

(Minkowski 1948: 145; translation by the author)

This illustrates the nature of gestalt, which is constituted by part–whole interaction, and not by a sum of single elements. Examples of such illumination and insight point to the situation where a change in a single aspect suddenly confers the gestalt with a new meaning.

Psychological states, according to Bergson, are not fragments of the self. They are ex pressions of the self, because each psychological state reflects and expresses the entire self of the person (Minkowski 1933: 209).

Here Minkowski expresses the concept of diagnosis by penetration, which relies on the second-person grasp of the psychological structure of the patient. This epistemic act is not (p. 109) only cognitive, but involves a global sentiment or Effective impact. This is not an inferential process, but rather an instance of direct grasp or intuition (intuition in the sense of direct perception).

The objective approach of psychiatry is insufficient and only allows us to analyze the men tal illness by isolating artificially each feature from each other and on which one confers their own autonomous reality (Minkowski 1933: 209). Minkowski argues that we need to complement the objective third-person’s approach of listing symptoms with more global Eugène Minkowski acts of “an intellectual sympathy” (diagnosis “ par pénération ”) to grasp the organizing psychological structure of the patient or, in other words, to grasp the gestalt.

Contemporary Relevance Almost all of the psychopathological ideas of Minkowski have survived the test of time and are still relevant today. First of all, Bleuler’s, Kretschmer’s, and Minkowski’s idea of spectrum disorder is now well established. Second, the view of schizotypal disorder (schizoïdia) as a more basic expression of the illness is also accepted and institutionalized in the diagnostic manual. Moreover, Minkowski’s concept of generative disorders has been revived by contemporary phenomenological psychiatry. Minkowski’s view of diagnosis as being based not only on an enumeration of symptoms, but also on a gestalt and pattern recognition is being in creasingly revived by a new emphasis on prototypical aspect of psychiatric diagnosis. Finally, in view of psychiatry’s increasingly dehumanizing practice by the mechanic diagnostic and therapeutic approaches, Minkowski’s ideal of clinical work as an essentially humanistic endeavor is more needed than ever. PAGE_BREAK The article presents Ludwig Binswanger’s approaches to psychoanalysis, psychiatry, and philosophy. His clinical practice in his sanatorium in Kreuzlingen, Switzerland close to the border to Germany was essentially determined by psychoanalysis and an individualized multiprofessional approach. Sigmund Freud supported this view—the published letters between him and Binswanger are important contributions of psychoanalytic and psych attic history. In addition, Binswanger regarded philosophy as an essential foundation of psychiatry and psychoanalysis. He knew many psychiatrists, psychoanalysts, philoso hers, and poets personally and exchanged many letters with them. First, he followed the phenomenological approach of Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger, later he was more identified with Martin Buber’s dialogical philosophy which he developed further. The arch cle goes deeper into Binswanger’s central concepts and shows how important they be came in the contemporary discussion where neurobiological, psychoanalytic, and socio logical research shows new ways for psychiatric and psychotherapeutic practice.

Keywords: psychoanalysis, inpatient treatment, therapeutic community, multiprofessionalism, dialogic philosophy # The Binswanger Family and the Bellevue Sana # thorium BINSWANGER’S grandfather, bearing the same name, Ludwig Binswanger, was born into a Jewish South German country family of small factory owners. He studied medicine in Munich, becoming a general practitioner and psychiatrist, but could not en ter the government medical service in Bavaria because he was Jewish. He took an active part in the 1848 revolution in Munich, fighting especially for equal rights for Jews, and got himself into even more difficulties than before. As he was already known as a skilled psychiatrist, Wilhelm Griesinger, one of the most influential psychiatrists of the time, recommended him for the post of director of the new cantonal mental hospital in Münsterlingen, Switzerland, near Constance. In 1857 Binswanger bought the sumptuous Ludwig Binswanger Bellevue Villa in Kreuzlingen, Switzerland, near the German border town Constance, and founded a private asylum for mentally affected patients. Under his son Robert Bin swinger, director from 1880 to 1910, Bellevue Sanatorium grew, more villas were built, the clientele became more and more upper-class, the site increasingly well known. In 1881 Brewer sent Bertha Pappenheim, known as Sigmund Freud’s case Anna O., to Bellevue for a morphine withdrawal treatment during the following years; Freud used to send patients who needed long-term treatment to Bellevue.

Ludwig Binswanger was born into this rich family tradition, in the sanatori um, and he grew up there alongside the patients. After his medical studies in Lausanne, Heidelberg, and Zurich he entered the Burghölzli Clinic in Zurich (as Karl Abraham’s suc Lessor), then presided over by Eugene Bleuler and his advisor Carl Gustav Jung. Jung su pervised his dissertation and joined him in carrying out association experiments. It was together with Jung that he visited Freud for the first time in 1907. In 1907 and 1908 Lud wig Binswanger worked under his uncle, the famous psychiatrist and neurologist Otto Binswanger at Dena University hospital, becoming familiar mainly with or Manic psychoses.

In 1908, he returned to Kreuzlingen and went to work for his father. Upon his father’s death in 1910, Ludwig took over the sanatorium, which he led until his retirement in 1956. (p. 112) Over these more than forty years, Bellevue Sanatorium became one of the centers of Central European cultural life and one of the very few if not the only psych attic sanatorium where psychoanalysis became the main method for treating psychoses. Well-known personalities like the Russian dancer Vaslav Nijinsky; the painter Ernst Lud wig Kirchner, who created twenty-two of his most important wood engravings at Kreuzlin gen; the sociologist Max Weber; and the actor and director Gustav Gründgens were treat ed there. The Bellevue guestbook and the list of correspondents contain recognized artists, scientists, and philosophers like Freud, Edmund Husserl, Max Schemer, Martin Heidegger, Karl Löwith, Martin Buber, Kurt Goldstein, Rudolf Alexander Stiröder, Wil helm FurtwäOgler, and Lerner Bergengrün among others. For Binswanger, psychoanaly sis and philosophy were important means for understanding his patients. Binswanger al ways saw himself as a clinician.

Although he worked closely with Jung in 1907, Binswanger stayed in contact with Freud after the 1914 split with the Zurich group. Despite their differences, mainly regarding philosophical issues, Freud and Binswanger remained good friends. This is evident in the Freud–Binswanger letters. Undoubtedly, Binswanger’s contacts with oth er psychoanalysts became less frequent than his relations with philosophers like Husserl, Heidegger, Buber, and Wilhelm Szilasi. Binswanger became an honorary doctor of the philosophical faculty of the University of Basel in 1941.

Until today, only few of Binswanger’s important publications have been translated into English. His main Sevres, “Einführung in die Problem der allege meinen Psychologies” and “Grundformen und Erkenntnis menschlichen Da sans”, are only available in German and Italian.

Ludwig Binswanger # Binswanger’s Contributions to Phenomenology # cal Psychopathology Binswanger (like Husserl) refused to follow the split between “Erklären” (explaining) and “Verstehen” (understanding) which was foundational for Karl Jasper’s psychopathology and has contributed to the biologistic ideology of classical psychiatry until the present day. Already in 1913 Binswanger criticized, in the Internationale Zeitschrift für ärztliche Psychoanalyze, Jasper’s work on causal and “understandable” connections between des tiny and psychosis in dementia praecox “from the standpoint of the psychoanalyst,” bas ing his argument on the phenomenological theory of knowledge of Theodora Lapps. Causal ity, in Binswanger’s words, exists also in the realm of subjective experiences and cannot be restricted to mental phenomena caused by biological processes. He writes: Jasper’ causal explanation in psychology is a psychophysical one, as we see; he seems only to admit a psychophysical causality next to physical or natural causal ty, but not causality in the purely psychic domain. But Jasper has not succeeded in proving that there is no psychic causality or no causality in the psychic domain.

“Every causal connection”, says Lapps, “is a regular dependence relationship be tween judgments made by the thinking mind.” All regularity or causality in the world that I know of is only this regular order, taking place in the thinking mind or in consciousness, consisting in this: When one thing, the so-called “cause”, (p. 113) is recognized as real, another thing, the so-called “effect”, must be recon Sized by the thinking mind as real; and the latter may not be recognized as real if the former has not had to be so recognized. Now it is not evident why this regular order, taking place in consciousness, should and cannot extend to the “psychology cal facts”.

1 (Binswanger 1913: 385)

For the first time, Binswanger showed himself here clearly as a psychiatrist and psycho analyst who made use of the phenomenological philosophy as the basis of psychoanalysis, that is, he rejected a cleavage. There were other phenomenological psychiatrists who lat er followed Jasper’s views but in psychoanalysis, Binswanger’s position was shared, for example, by the Swiss psychoanalyst and protestant minister Oscar Pfister and by the phenomenological psychiatrist Alfred Stork. Freud himself had also rejected Jasper’s view by stressing that biographical experiences are the cause of mental problems—not neglecting what he called constitution, that is, biological (including genetic) factors. Jasper’s so-called “Schichtenlehre” ( theory of levels ) argues that organic factors are the most determinative, then follow so-called endogenic factors (manic-depressive illness or schizophrenia), and on top of that “neurotic symptoms” as variations of the personality (Jasper 1997: 564–617). Until recently, this view influenced academic psychiatry much more than Binswanger’s and Freud’s view that life circumstances and traumatizations as well as good bonding experiences can causally influence mental illness and symptoms. Recent findings in neurobiology, however, turn this picture around and now strongly sup Ludwig Binswanger port Freud’s and Binswanger’s view that bonding and traumatizations directly influence the biological level or brain function, indicating that there is no general hierarchy of the organic—endogenic—neurotic.

On Binswanger’s account, when a patient with schizophrenia recounts experiences which we regard as psychotic, these communications, considered phenomenologically, are not simply symptoms of hallucinatory mental illness, but rather they tell about the sick person’s world of experience. We can see the patient as a person before us, having a Bela son to dark mental powers, moving in a mental sphere quite different from our own: The essential thing... in the phenomenological consideration of such psy chopathological phenomena is that they are never an isolated phenomenon; the phenomenon always plays against the backdrop of an ego, a person; in other words, we always see it as an expression of a revelation about a particular person.

In the particular phenomenon the respective person reveals something about him self, and conversely we see through the phenomenon into the person.

(Binswanger 1994a: 68)

For the contemporary discussion, this text retains important implications. Interpersonal psychoanalysis and attachment theory in particular stress that the human being is oriel Bated from the beginning toward relation and encounter, that an intentionality exists on both sides, and that this is a genetically determined need. This is reality-related, directed toward comprehending the quality of the relationship in its historical development.

Let us turn to Binswanger’s important book Über Ideenflucht from 1933 ( On the Flight of Ideas ). It starts with historical remarks about mania and melancholy and emphasizes Griesinger, who already showed that diseases are mainly diseases of wishes. Binswanger sees the wish as an anthropological design of human beings encom passing (p. 114) psychological, logical, and ethical issues which cannot be reduced to bio logical questions. Referring to Søren Kierkegaard, Heidegger, and Jasper, Binswanger stressed the self as the existential principle (Binswanger 1992a: 132). All psychiatric symptoms are, according to Binswanger, anthropological modes of existence which can also be examined from the scientific point of view as brain disorders. The phenomenology cal view not only allows, but requires, that we deal with these symptoms in a psychother apeutic way, by talking with the patient and by interpreting the symptoms in terms of the interpersonal encounter. The patient is at least partly responsible for his symptoms—not only as contemporary psychiatry sometimes claims by taking his medication, but also by understanding his symptoms in the biographical context.

Psychotic Illness Binswanger fought to find a sense in illness, especially in psychotic illness. Illness is not only a defect or the symbol of a defect, but also a hermeneutic way of finding a new sense in individual as well in collective life (Binswanger 1992a: 20).

Ludwig Binswanger Binswanger draws on European philosophy at length, reaching his conclusion—also for Emulated by Buber—that love and the basis of existence are rooted in the Other, in the Thou. Here, he also draws a clear line against Heidegger’s thinking and stresses his stand in dialogical philosophy, even more radical than Buber but well in line with contemn porary interpersonal psychoanalysis and group analysis: We see ever more clearly what Heidegger is getting at here, namely the selfless of Casein (existence) in acting. He glimpses in this—as he says once in passing in “Von Ween des Grunges” [“On the Essence of Ground”]—the heart of existence.

We too, even though in an entirely different sense, speak of the heart of existence or—better—of existence as heart. But we do not glimpse this “heart” in the self Bess of existence in acting but in the We-Bess of existence in loving. That this is not a matter of a mere difference of opinion, but rather of an ontologically based difference, becomes evident from the fact that no (ontological) way leads to the We-Bess of existence in loving from the selfless of existence in acting, but the oth er way round: from the We-Bess in loving to selfless in acting.

(Binswanger 1993: 126)

I can entertain or busy myself with an image or an idea, but only in a one-sided way, in monologue. But you answer me. I don’t just imagine you, but above all you yourself— with every look and every word—imagine yourself to me (and vice-ver sa). We-Bess in loving is a wave, a greeting, a cry, a demand, an embrace of xis Fence with itself, in one word: encounter. This encounter can no more be unilater ally ‘brought about’ and planned than it can be thought out and “presented”: it is —as both Ur-encounter and as factual Thou-encounter—a gift of existence to it self: grace.

(Binswanger 1993: 157)

The texts might sound mystical. They are written in a language no longer familiar to psy choanalysts of today, but lead back to the anthropological dimension of every psychother apy, because “in a true psychotherapy an I-Thou-relationship must crystallize” (Bin swinger 1993: 208). Psychosis has—in Binswanger’s view—to do with the loss of the ethic cal, the dimension of responsibility toward fellow human beings: What we in psychiatry (p. 115) label with such clear moral expressions as irresponsibility or non-committal speech, as “unrestrained” chattering and, depending on the other characteristics, jag nose as a symptom of feeble-mindedness or dementia, a schizophrenic process or a manic flight of ideas, concerns the moral no less than the intellectual sphere and is based in each case on a particular form of existential perception of time and history (Binswanger 1993: 295–296). Through love, through good new object relations, psychotic patients can become healthier again. Love is not just meant as empathy or sympathetic feeling, but as a deep involvement by the care-taker with the patient’s subjectivity in the past and present and with his existential dimensions, his relations with other people including the therapist.

Ludwig Binswanger After 1945, Binswanger became widely known in German psychiatry and psychoanalysis. Gustav Bally acknowledged in his Introduction to Freud’s Psychoanalysis that Binswanger brought a philosophical approach into psychoanalysis. In contrast to Heideg ger, Binswanger always stayed in contact with Husserl and with his wife, and he had a close relationship with the Jewish philosopher Buber who for some time had questioned Heidegger’s extreme emphasis of the single human being. In Switzerland, first Medard Boss and then his colleague Ion Condrau became interested in Heidegger’s philosophy in the 1950s and later, on the basis of Heidegger’s philosophy, they developed a form of psychoanalysis which they called Casein (existence) analysis. Heidegger was often in Switzerland in the 1950s, and Binswanger, who had introduced Boss and Heidegger to each other, lost influence. He never wanted to found a psychoanalytic school, and not at all one based on Heidegger’s work.

In his late work Drew Foremen mißglückten Daseins (Three Forms of Failed Existence ), psychosis is once again seen as an existential human possibility and phe nomenon, not only as a disease. The three basic terms “Verstiegenheit” (extravagance), “Verschrobenheit” (eccentricity), and “Manieriertheit” (affectation) are presented as fun damental forms of being, present in everybody, but becoming dominant in different forms of psychosis. “Verstiegenheit” can never be characteristic of the individual as such; it al ways exists in relation to the other, to the world: What we call psychotherapy is basically nothing else than bringing the sick person to where he can “see” how the overall structure of human existence or “being-inthe-world” is constructed and at which point he has climbed onto difficult terrain.

That means: to bring him back from extravagance “down to earth”, to the only place from which a new start and a new ascent are possible, into the interhuman encounter.

(Binswanger 1992b: 247)

Binswanger refers to the German philosopher Friedrich Wilhelm Josef Schelling, for whom mental illness was identical with pure reflection (Binswanger 1992b: 305). “Ver schrobenheit” also means unawareness of the historical dimension. Love and encounter are the remedies against this (Binswanger 1992b: 316). Only by situating oneself in hist ry, can one detect one’s true self—to use Donald W. Winnicott’s term —or “Selbstigung” (selling) as it is called by Binswanger. Binswanger often comes quite close to a materialistic concept of the human psyche which is, according to Karl Marx, the en semble of the economic conditions of humankind. The true self means to be aware of one’s situation and condition in the present society in relation to others as well as to oth er societies and to the world in its condition. By love and encounter, autism can be changed; not autism, but love, is primary (contrary to Freud’s primary autism) (Bin swinger 1992b: 418).

(p. 116) In his last major study Hahn (Paranoia ), published in 1965, Binswanger advocates a phenomenological understanding of psychopathological phenom ena that proceeds from a pathology in the area of overall intentionality (not a pathology Ludwig Binswanger exclusively limited to the thought functions, as Jasper argues). The essential feature of mental illness is the exclusive relation to one’s own ego, which Binswanger emphasizes with an impressive string of sentences by a woman with delusions, going on to observe that: Nowhere do we find a (dual) We, an Us or an Our, not to speak of a Thou or a Thee. Aline exhausts herself fully in the plural mode: I and the Others, the Others and I. This mode still experiences a decisive expansion, insofar as the communica son possibilities here far exceed the usual measure and also make use of electric ty, magnetism, telegraphy, telepathy, thought reading, hearing thoughts, mediums, etc.

(Binswanger 1994b: 475)

Conclusion This emphasis on the interpersonal character of mental illness remains one of Binswanger’s lasting contributions to mental health care. Mental illness is clearly a deli sent mode of transcending “characterized in the first instance by the fact that creation of images is strongly impoverished, namely mechanized, that a fixed scheme takes the place of their variability and mobility” ( Binswanger 1994b: 471). But also decisive is the answer of the other, encounter and relation as a new, therapeutic offer. Not only the psychiatrist or the individual psychotherapist are important for this answer, but the whole therapeutic community of the institution which treats the patient, the other patients, the patient’s family, friends and work colleagues, etc. Binswanger’s view of psychiatry and psycho analysis is open to society’s influence, but also to the multiprofessional settings that he organized in his Bellevue Sanatorium in Kreuzlingen. Inter-human encounter takes place many hours a day, therefore the culture of the institution is central for the healing en counter. Verbal therapies are important, but also arts, sports, common games, and cul Cure. Patients whose deep psychotic regression does not allow extensive talks might be reached by non-verbal methods. Binswanger’s work remains relevant today for a phenom ecological and psychotherapeutic approach for severely regressed patients, in inpatient as well as in outpatient conditions. Not only academic medical or psychological staff, but also nurses, art therapists, ergotherapists, and sports therapists can benefit from his ap roaches, as they are all involved in personal encounters with their patients. Binswanger’s theory and practice are relevant particularly in therapeutic community and group analysis and in the psychoanalytic approach with severely disturbed patients. PAGE_BREAK Medard Boss’s extensive medical education in Zurich, Paris, Vienna, Berlin, and London was crowned with his lifelong friendship with Freud and Heidegger. He admired Freud’s praxis of psychotherapy but opposed his ‘scientistic’ metapsychology. After his service as a military doctor he got to know the Swiss psychiatrist L. Binswanger who acquainted him with Heidegger’s greatest work San und Deist. After the war, Boss himself met Heidegger who introduced him to the human, time-and death bound Da-Rein, to his cri Pique of Western metaphysics as ‘Oblivion of Being’ and to his new quest for the reveal ing-concealing mystery of Beings as disclosive Ereignis. Consequently Boss’ own Daseins- Analysis, inspired and supervised by Heidegger, transformed Freud’s metapsychology of the unconscious and the interpretation of dreams into an entirely new approach to Jedi cine and psychotherapy. Unfortunately, the revolutionary theory of the unconscious as a unique language by the French philosopher J. Laban. Could not anymore integrated into Boss’ work. Other influences upon Boss have been C.G. Jung, J.P. Stare, K. Jasper, M. Merleau-Monty, E. Umkourski, W. Blankenburg, H. Plunge, and H. Hellenbach.

Keywords: San und Deist, Casein, Ereignis, Being, metaphysics, language, Laban, dreams, metapsychology, Da sans-Analysis “We are unknown to ourselves, we men of knowledge” (Nietzsche)

Biography of Medard Boss BORN in St. Fallen, Switzerland, on October 4, 1903, Boss earned his medical degree from the University of Zurich in 1928. During his studies, he traveled to Paris and Vienna. In Vienna’s famous medical school he studied under Sigmund Freud and was analyzed by Freud himself. Furthermore he became acquainted with Vienna’s philosophical and psy chological schools. The Viennese philosopher-psychologist Franz Brentano was a great influence upon the young Freud and upon Husserl, and indirectly upon Hei dagger. After four years as an assistant to Eugene Bleuler at the Burghölzli Medard Boss hospital (Zurich) Boss continued to study in Berlin and London under earlier disciples of Freud, such as Karen Honey and Kurt Goldstein who opposed Freud’s explanation of hu man behavior by instincts rather than by the total human personality.

Beginning in 1938 Boss became associated with Carl Gustav Jung (aniveres-amima) and his analytical psychology. Jung, who formerly split from the Viennese Freud circle, taught Boss an alternative to Freud’s psychoanalysis and interpretation of dreams. At the same time he started to read the works of Ludwig Binswanger who not only worked out an “ex istential psychotherapy” inspired by Heidegger, but introduced Boss to Heidegger’s filo sophical work, especially during the Second World War when he served as a military doc tor in the Alpine Swiss Army.

In the preface to the first German edition of Martin Heidegger’s Zollikon Seminars, later edited by Boss, Boss very bluntly tells us of his troubled first encounter with Heidegger’s opus magnum, Being and Time (1962 ), during his military service: For the first time in my life I was occasionally gripped by boredom. In the midst of it what we call “time” became problematic for me... by chance I came across a newspaper item about Heidegger’s book Being and Time. I plunged into it but I discovered that I understood almost none of its content. The book opened up ques son after question which I had never encountered before in my entire scientifical ly oriented education... Disappointed I laid the (p. 119) book aside only half-read, but strangely it gave me no rest. I would pick it up again and again and begin studying anew. This first conversation with Heidegger outlasted the war.

(Heidegger 2001: vii–viii)

After much trepidation, Boss had a first meeting with Heidegger in 1946, which started a twenty-five-year friendship with Heidegger. Boss slowly realized that modern psychology and medicine was based upon the Hippocratic medical model, the subjectivist philosophy of Descartes and the Newtonian physics, both of which adhered to a mechanistic interpretation of the human being which Heidegger radically questioned. Boss started to lay a new systematic existential foundation for Jedi cine and psychology, in particular psychotherapy. His existential psychotherapy is critical of Freud’s so-called “scientific” metapsychology without in any way questioning the greatness of Freud in the “praxis” of psychotherapy from which Boss himself learned so much (Boss 1963: 61–74).

There is no doubt that Boss revered Freud and adored the genius of Heidegger “between good and evil”. Boss knew that Freud’s psychoanalysis was the newest result of the diverse periods of European Enlightenment. It started with the Greek knoll edge of the mortal “self” (“ Gnothi Seauton,” know thyself) and with the Socratic “The un examined life is not worth living for a human being” (Plato, Apology ).

Throughout his life, Boss defended Freud’s pioneering work in psychotherapy despite his abandonment of Freud’s metapsychology such as the theories of the “unconscious,” “re Medard Boss precision,” the “libido theories,” the functions of the Ego, Id, and Superego. Boss wrote among other things about Freud’s fundamental therapeutic rule (absolute honesty and truthfulness between the patient and the therapist), but also on the contradiction be tween Freud’s strong emphasis on human freedom and the strongly deterministic view (the “psychic apparatus”) in his theoretical works ( Boss 1979: 277). Finally, Boss agreed with Freud’s original idea of the “meaningfulness” not only of dreams but of all human phenomena in mental health and illness (Freud 1953a; Boss 1963).

One of the first influences upon Boss was his mentor and friend, the Swiss psychiatrist Ludwig Binswanger who in addition to Jasper and Bleuler was one of the founders of classical “phenomenological psychopathology” in which Heidegger’s Being and Time became the basis of his own psychiatric Daseinsanalysis. Binswanger, a lifelong friend but theoretical opponent of Freud, shared many views with Boss’s Daseins analysis. In contrast, Heidegger’s relationship with Binswanger’s Daseinsanalysis (Bin swinger 1975: 206–221; Boss 1979: 71) ended up with his critique of Binswanger’s (a) on tidal, subject-oriented psychic “projection” of the world in contrast to Heidegger’s cir cumspective ontological being-in-the-world, and (b) Heidegger’s critique that Binswanger supplemented Heidegger’s ontological care with his own optical love which later Bin swinger admitted as a “productive misunderstanding” of Heidegger’s Analytic of Casein (Heidegger 2001: 115–116, 190–192, 203–207, 304, 307).

Boss and Phenomenology In his main work, Boss dissociative identity disorder not refer explicitly to Husserl’s phenomenology although Husserl’s work is presupposed in the Zollikon Seminars where Heidegger (and Boss) took a (p. 120) critical stance toward Husserl’s “transcendental phenomenology.” For Heideg ger, Husserl’s phenomenology was the last descendant of modern philosophy since Descartes’s dualism of the internal “subject” ( res cogitans ) and the external “object” ( res extensa ) (Descartes 1993; Heidegger 2001: 105–110, 146–147). Even Husserl called his phenomenology “the secret nostalgia of all modern philosophy” ( Husserl 1982: 142; see also Safranski 1998: 79).

The most decisive difference and critique of Husserl’s noesis –noema dualism as “a pure construct” ( Heidegger 2001: 208) can be stated by comparing the two respective terms of Husserl ( subjectivity ) and Heidegger ( being ) (Husserl 1970; Heidegger 2001: 146; Zahavi 2003; Fugal 2012). In the 1962 Preface to Richardson’s book, Heidegger: Through Phe nomenology to Thought, Heidegger stated: The Being-question, unfolded in Being and Time, parted company with this [i.e., Husserl’s] philosophical position, and that on the basis of what to this day I still consider a more faithful adherence to the principle of phenomenology.

(Heidegger 1963; Richardson 1963: xiv)

Medard Boss First and foremost, “Being” is “hidden” ( Heidegger 1962: 36, 56) as a phenomenon and has to be explicated as the unthematic background (“horizon”) of all other “beings,” in Elusive of human Casein as the “guardian” and “shepherd” of Being ( Heidegger 1962: 22– 35; Heidegger 1993: 245).

In Husserl’s phenomenology, the question of the Being of beings (Heidegger 1962: 2–35) was reduced to the being (“objectivity”) as intuited essence and “object” ( noema ) which Heidegger called the mere “ vorhanden ” (present-at-hand ) reality of “things” (Boelen 1975: 93–114; Watanabe 1993 ). Thus, the early Husserl’s intuition of “essence” became in Heidegger the ec-static, temporal, that is, the unfolding essence (Heidegger 1993: 424) within the primordial pre-understanding of Being. Similarly, in Heidegger’s perspective Husserl’s (transcendental) consciousness and its “intentionality” presupposes the cortex Dual, “field-like” “Casein ” (Heidegger 2001: 207) of a shared historical world (Boelen 1975: 108–114; Ricoeur 1970 ). Casein as being-in-the-world and its pre-reflective “mine Bess” is prior ( Heidegger 2001: 129–132, 142) to any epistemological dualism of the “giv en” and “concepts” in the Kantian or early Husserlian sense (“ hyletic data ”) (Heidegger 2001: 142).

Boss gave more attention to Merleau-Monty’s phenomenology of the human body ( Boss 1979: 130; Heidegger 2001: 231–234) than to Sartre’s frequently overlooked phenom nology of the pre-reflective “self” or Sartre’s “gaze” and “mirror” scene in his Nausea. Merleau-Monty’s Phenomenology of Perception was influenced—as later Levinas(insomnia, alterity, traumatism)(1961 )—by Husserl and Heidegger. With his sens tivity to language (Boss 1979: 125, 133–134), Boss pointed out that Merleau-Monty, whose work he admired, changed the Sartrean dualistic translation of Heidegger’s being-in-theworld (ệtre-ans-le-mode ) into his being-of-the-world ( ệtre-du-mode ). By introducing the concept of the “dwelling” ( Wohnen ) of the soul in the body Merleau-Monty sets himself (without total success) the special task of transcending Cartesian dualism (Boss 1979: 129). He still cannot overcome the Cartesian heritage (Merleau-Monty 1945/1962: 198; Boss 1979: 92–97, 130; Heidegger 2001: 157) which is entirely different from Heidegger’s “dwelling”—the human being’s ec-static relation to “Being ” as “clear ing” in the openness of his “being-in-the-world” ( Heidegger 1993: 343–363; Boss 1979: 128–130).

(p. 121) Phenomenological Aspects of Boss’s Psy # chopathology Boss’s psychopathology is not conceived from Husserl’s pure phenomenology of “ran scendental subjectivity,” but rather from Heidegger’s “Being,” as process of the reveal ing-concealing Ereignis (disclosing Event), “Casein,” and “being-in-the-world.” Boss’s psy chopathology, following Heidegger (Heidegger 2001: 153), discussed among other things (against Freud’s metapsychology) such psychiatric symptoms as hysteria, psychosomatic disturbances (migraines, etc.), obsessional neuroses, narcissistic neuroses, sadistic per versions, transference and countertransference, “acting out,” guilt feelings, and the mod Medard Boss ern depressive neurosis of boredom (Boss 1963: 131–284; Heidegger 2001: 208). Heidegger’s ontological Being-with (Mitsein ) is, next to the human being’s existential Thrownness (Geworfenheit ), understanding (Verstehen ), and being-unto-death (Boss 1979: 119–122; Heidegger 2001: 139), the tacit background of all psychopathologies and their existential cures (Boss 1979: 275; Heidegger 2001: 157–211). This does not exclude the importance of the present, and still developing, neuroscience and brain research nor some of Freud’s developmental insights (bi-sexuality, Oedipus, Űberdetermination of dreams and texts) (Churchland 1986; Panksepp 2004; Sass et al. 2011; Krupp 2000: 56– 84) with some of Freud’s psychological developmental insights.

It was the French psychiatrist and philosopher, Jacques Laban, who understood the “un conscious” as “ structured like a language ”. After Laban’s ( Laban 1978: 130; Richardson 1993: 50–63) interpretation of the Freudian “unconscious” in terms of the “symbolic” language, Boss pointed out that Freud’s initial linguistic use of the term “unconscious” for a psychic “ process ” ended up in a “substantial ” usage ( Boss 1979: 135–136; Heidegger 2001: 153, 216).

Laban’s new interpretation of the unconscious in terms of a special “language” provided a new non-objectified understanding of the unconscious. The unconscious is the ultimate “Other” (Being) for the “subject.” Nevertheless, Laban’s (subjectivistic-Saussurian) and fi ally “mathematical” linguistic interpretation of the unconscious could not be integrated into Heidegger’s being-in-the-world (Saussure 1915; Richardson 1993: 58) or into later Heidegger’s view of language as “saying” and “hearing” ( Heidegger 2001: 96–97; Mar 2001).

Boss reinterpreted the Freudian “unconscious” as an a prior construction after the fail ure of Freud’s “natural scientific,” causal explanation (Heidegger 2001: 224; see also Wittgenstein 1968; Boss 1977: 2–3; Monk 2005: 73–77) of the “gaps” between conscious awareness and the unexplained phenomena of dreams and parapraxes (faulty actions)— such as sudden forgetting, sudden insights, slip of the tongue, posthypnotic behavior, etc. (Boss 1963: 86–91; Freud 1995: 572–584; Heidegger 2001: 182, 187). For Boss the union scions belongs like the conscious to the experience of Casein’s being-in-the-world ( Boss 1977: 175–215), which opens up to the “ hiddenness ” of Being itself (Boss 1979: 135–146). Laban said about “Being”: “This last word that is not accessible to us... in the scientific attitude” ( Laban 1978: 130). In Heidegger, this “hiddenness” of Being makes itself Bani fest as the inaccessible “mystery” in the human being’s conscious and “unconscious,” tem oral being-in-the-world (Heidegger 2001: 183). By contrast, the Freudian reified unconscious—as if belonging “to someone else” ( Freud 1995a: 575)—with its repressed material is timeless and spaceless (Freud 1995a: 579).

(p. 122) Removed from the Heideggerian temporality and spatiality of Casein’s being-inthe-world (Boss 1979: 80–100, 182–183; Freud 1995a ). Additionally, Freud’s causal “(in stinctual) explanation of dreams as unconscious wish fulfillment” (“Desire” in Laban; Richardson 1983: 152–153) censored or repressed by the intrapsychic [Cartesian] Ego, were by Heidegger integrated into the equiprimordial aspects of holistic “wakening” and Medard Boss “dreaming” of Casein’s existential “being-in-the world” ( Heidegger 2001: 245) and under standing of Being.

The dream world cannot be separated as an object domain into itself, but rather the dream world belongs in a certain way to the continuity of being-in-the-world. It is likewise a being-in-the-world.

(Heidegger 2001: 228–231)

Boss applied these insights in his own dream-book “I dream last night...” ( Boss 1979: 45–48, 61–62, 167–169, 179–215) without considering also the linguistic character of the remembered dream world (see Richardson 1993: 57–60).

The most important psychiatrists influential on Boss are the following: (a) Jasper: Boss referred to Jasper’s difficulty defining “consciousness” in the Cartesian view of an introspective consciousness (Boss 1979: 133; Heidegger 2001: 225–226). Jasper applied a broader “phenomenological method” which was earlier also used by the influential philosopher-psychologist Wilhelm Dilthey, with his dis tinction between scientific “explanation by causes” ( Erklären ) and historical-filo sophical “understanding of meaning” ( Verstehen ). Despite Jasper’s originality in un derstanding some aspect of schizophrenia, he still adhered in a rationalistic way to the ultimate logical incomprehensibility of schizophrenia instead of the impairment of the pre-reflective, lived life itself. Jasper’s doctrine became the questionable cri terion of “poor reality testing” and of a “cognitive error and a false belief” of the schizophrenic mind (Sass 1992: 125–132).

(b) Minkowski: The French-Polish psychiatrist Eugene Minkowski was the author of the famous Le temps vécu: Etudes phénoménologiques et psy chopathologiques. In his discussion of “ lived time ” versus the “scientif ic” clock-time, Minkowski wanted to recover our lost sense of lived time, which played such a great role in Husserl’s Augustine-inspired “inner timeconsciousness” but which was critiqued as “subjectivistic” in Heidegger’s “existential temporality” of Casein’s being-in-the-world ( Ricoeur 1970; Boss 1979: 213; Heidegger 2001: 38–42).

(c) Blankenburg: Equally, Heidegger criticized the phenomenological anthropologist Wolfgang Blankenburg (Heidegger 2001: 204, 275) who analyzed the spatial and temporal structures of the world of the schizophrenic. To Blankenburg’s misunderstanding of the “ontological difference,” Heidegger re marked: In contrast to Binswanger, Blankenburg indeed sees the ontological differ Once [between Being and beings], but he misinterprets it because he also takes Being (San) as a being [Seiendes] which must then be mediated with the other.

(Heidegger 2001: 204)

Medard Boss (d) Plügge: Among the anthropological psychiatrists, Heidegger and Boss discussed Herbert Plügge within the context of an existential notion of (modern) “ stress ” (p. 123) (Heidegger 2001: 141–143, 275; Boss 1979: 206–210) and other illnesses in modern technological, post-Marxist society (Marx 1953: 246; Boss 1979: 286–297; Heidegger 2001).

(e) Tellenbach: The psychiatrist Hubert's Tellenbach researched the distortion of the spatial world of the “melancholic” and epileptic ( Boss 1979: 37) similar to the disturb Dance of time observed by Minkowski and Straps (1956/1963). Boss has shown that many traditional, so-called “organic psychoses” may be causally related to a biophysical frontal lobe damage but are (originally) to be understood (Verstehen ) from Casein’s pathological impairment of its ec-static, holistic relation to Being and being-in-the-world.

According to Boss, Plügge, Blankenburg, and Tellenbach applied mostly an empirical-Anti cal phenomenology, like Jasper had done (Spiegelberg 1972: 105; Boss 1979: 213–219). Boss discussed at length illnesses, especially schizophrenia, which are phenomenological encroachments on the openness and existential freedom of Casein (Boss 1979: 223–235).

In conclusion, similar to Socrates and Hippocrates, so in our times, Heidegger and Boss had emphasized a) the basic distinction between philosophy, science, the art of medicine and healing, and b) the entirely new “ontological difference” between Being and beings, always threatened by the abyss of passions and the mystery of suffering (Gr. Pathos ) of our human timeand death-bound existence. PAGE_BREAK (p. 125) Richardson W. J.. Preface. In W. J. Richardson, Heidegger: Through Phe nomenology to Thought, pp. xxv–xxix. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff. Richardson W. J.. “Psychoanalysis and the Being-question.” In J. H. Smith and W. Kerrigan (eating disorders.), Interpreting Laban, pp. 139–159. New Haven: Yale University Press. Richardson W. J.. “Heidegger Among the Doctors.” In J. Wallis (ed.), Reading Hei dagger, pp. 57–63. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Medard Boss Husserl E.. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book. General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology, trans. F. Kirsten. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff. Kant, I.. Critique of Pure Reason, trans. P. Buyer and A. W. Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lain Entralgo P.. The Therapy of the Word in Classical Antiquity, ed. and trans. L. J. Rather and J. M. Sharp. New Haven: Yale University Press. Levinas E.. Totality and Infinity: an Essay on Exteriority, trans. A. Lings. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press. Laban J.. Ecrits. A Selection, trans. A. Sheridan. New York: Norton. Laban J.. Le Seminaire: Lire second: Le moi ans la Theorize de Freud et ans la tech Pique de la psychoanalyze. Paris: Seuil. Marx K.. Die Frühschriften. Stuttgart: Kroner. Mar F.. Geschichte der Philosophic I. Antique. Kevelaer: Button-Becker. Mar F.. “The Question of Being, Language and Translation.” In M. Heidegger, Zol Nikon Seminars: Protocols—Conversations, Letters. Edited by Medard Boss, trans. F. Mar and R. Assay, 317–336. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Merleau-Monty M. (1945/1962). Phenomenologie de la perception. Paris: Edition Gall Bard/Phenomenology of Perception. London: Rutledge. Minkowski E. (1933/1970). Le Temps vécu: Etudes phénoménologiques et psy chopathologiques. Paris: d’Artery/ Lived Time: Phenomenological and Psychopathological Studies, trans. N. Metzel. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Monk R.. How to Read Wittgenstein. New York: Norton. Muller J. P. and Richardson W.. Laban and Language. A Reader’s Guide to Ecrits. New York: International Universities Press. Panksepp J.. Effective Neuroscience. New York: Oxford University Press.

(p. 125) Richardson W. J.. Preface. In W. J. Richardson, Heidegger: Through Phe nomenology to Thought, pp. xxv–xxix. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff. Richardson W. J.. “Psychoanalysis and the Being-question.” In J. H. Smith and W. Kerrigan (eating disorders.), Interpreting Laban, pp. 139–159. New Haven: Yale University Press. Richardson W. J.. “Heidegger Among the Doctors.” In J. Wallis (ed.), Reading Hei dagger, pp. 57–63. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Medard Boss Ricoeur P.. Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New Haven: Yale University Press. Safranski R.. Martin Heidegger. Between Good and Evil. Cambridge, Mass: Har Bard University Press. Sartre J. P.. Being and Nothingness, trans. H. E. Barnes. New York: Philosophical Library. Sartre J. P.. Nausea, trans. L. Alexander. New York: New Directions. Sass L.. “Heidegger, Schizophrenia, and the Ontological Difference.” Philosophical Psychology 5: 109–132. Sass L., Paras J., and Zahavi D.. “Phenomenological Psychopathology and Schizo phrenia: Contemporary Approaches and Misunderstandings.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 18: 1–23. Saussure F.. Course in General Linguistics, trans. W. Buskin. New York: McGraw Hill. Spiegelberg H.. Phenomenology in Psychology and Psychiatry. Evanston: North western University Press. Straps E. (1956/1963). Vom Inn der Sine. Ein Beitrag zur Grundlegung der Psychologies, 2nd edn./The Primary World of Senses: A Vindication of Sensory Experience, trans. J. Needleman. Glencoe, Il: Free Press. Krupp M.. On Freud. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. Watanabe J.. “Categorical Intuition and the Understanding of Being in Husserl and Heidegger.” In J. Wallis (ed.), Reading Heidegger, pp. 109–117. Bloomington: Indiana Uni varsity Press. Wittgenstein L.. Vorlesungen und Gespräche über Aesthetic, Psychologies, und Deli ion. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck. Zahavi D.. Husserl’s Phenomenology. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Franz Mar Department of Philosophy, University of Portland Medard Boss Ricoeur P.. Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New Haven: Yale University Press. Safranski R.. Martin Heidegger. Between Good and Evil. Cambridge, Mass: Har Bard University Press. Sartre J. P.. Being and Nothingness, trans. H. E. Barnes. New York: Philosophical Library. Sartre J. P.. Nausea, trans. L. Alexander. New York: New Directions. Sass L.. “Heidegger, Schizophrenia, and the Ontological Difference.” Philosophical Psychology 5: 109–132. Sass L., Paras J., and Zahavi D.. “Phenomenological Psychopathology and Schizo phrenia: Contemporary Approaches and Misunderstandings.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 18: 1–23. Saussure F.. Course in General Linguistics, trans. W. Buskin. New York: McGraw Hill. Spiegelberg H.. Phenomenology in Psychology and Psychiatry. Evanston: North western University Press. Straps E. (1956/1963). Vom Inn der Sine. Ein Beitrag zur Grundlegung der Psychologies, 2nd edn./The Primary World of Senses: A Vindication of Sensory Experience, trans. J. Needleman. Glencoe, Il: Free Press. Krupp M.. On Freud. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. Watanabe J.. “Categorical Intuition and the Understanding of Being in Husserl and Heidegger.” In J. Wallis (ed.), Reading Heidegger, pp. 109–117. Bloomington: Indiana Uni varsity Press. Wittgenstein L.. Vorlesungen und Gespräche über Aesthetic, Psychologies, und Deli ion. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck. Zahavi D.. Husserl’s Phenomenology. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Franz Mar Department of Philosophy, University of Portland Erwin Straps Erwin Straps Thomas Fuchs The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Erwin Straps was a German neurologist, psychiatrist, psychologist, and philosopher who was forced to emigrate to the United States in 1938. Based on Husserl’s phenomenology, he developed a phenomenological psychology based on sense perception and bodily movement which he applied to various areas of psychopathology. A crucial dis tinction he developed is between a passive or “pathic” (sensing) moment of perception on the one hand, and an active or “Gnostic” (recognizing) moment on the other hand. The former may become decoupled and preponderant in anxiety, delusional mood, or drug in toxication, whereas the latter prevails in derealization and depersonalization. Among Straps’s major works are The Primary World of the Senses and Phenomenological Psychology. He may be counted among the leading representatives of phenomena logical and anthropological psychiatry even to the present day.

Keywords: Erwin Straps, phenomenology, psychology, psychopathology, perception, senses, movement # Introduction ERWIN Straps, the neurologist, psychiatrist, psychologist, philosopher, and contemporary of Binswanger, von Gebsattel, and Minkowski, is regarded among the lead ing representatives of phenomenological and anthropological psychiatry during the Jeri od before and after the Second World War. His works on the phenomenology of sensory experience and the Psychology of the Human World, which bear the hallmarks of an orig nal mind and a lively writing style, belong to the classic works in this field. As Spiegel berg noted, “few phenomenologists have combined so much of the artist with the scion Dist” (Spiegelberg 1972: 278).

Erwin Straps # Biography Born in Frankfurt in 1891, Erwin Straps qualified as a medical doctor at Berlin University where he started his career and practice as a neurologist and psychiatrist. In 1927, he completed the professorial Habilitation and, from 1931 to 1935, he was Extraordinary Professor of Psychiatry at Berlin University. In 1928, he was a co-founding editor of Der Nervenarzt (still an internationally recognized journal today), and his co-editorship lasted until 1935. Despite his impressive career, as a Jew, Straps felt forced to emigrate to the United States in 1938. Initially, he was a lecturer in philosophy and psychiatry at Black Mountain College in North Carolina. From 1946 until 1961, he was Director of the Deter ans Administration Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, where he continued lecturing until 1956. He never returned to Germany; nonetheless, he remained firmly associated with the researchers and scholars here, and for many years he maintained close friendships with Victor Emil von Gebsattel, Eugène Minkowski, and Ludwig Binswanger. From 1963 to 1972, he convened the five “Lexington Conferences on Phenomenology, Pure and Ap plied,” which fostered an intensive dialogue between American and European phenom nology. Straps died in Lexington in 1975.

(p. 127) Phenomenological Psychology In his early works, for example, Geschehnis und Erlebnis (Event and Experience ), Straps critically examined the epistemological foundations of Freud’s psychoanalysis and behaviorism. He acutely delimited the sphere of psychic experience from abstracted, qua si-physical “Carousals,” “drives,” or stimulus-reaction schemes. According to Straps, exp rience is formed through a sense-making perception ( Sinnentnahme ) which is stimulated by a given situation, yet nonetheless implies a preconceptual understanding of this situ son along with an active, Inquiring relationship to it. Since each experience is thus grounded on preceding individual experiences, it is withdrawn from empirical generalize ability.

Straps was familiar with Edmund Husserl’s phenomenology, which he studied in Munich and Göttingen, and his works were particularly influenced by Husserl’s thought, even if he remained skeptical about his turn to transcendental phenomenology. For Straps there is no absolute consciousness beyond the human world—his phenomenology is basically anthropological, meaning that it is always concerned with the experience of the individ ual as a living organism, his bodily existence, and his life-world. Here, Straps was particu Carly searching for the “basic axioms of everyday life” which go largely unnoticed because they are intrinsic to our experience.

Erwin Straps’s phenomenological psychology is based primarily on his analyses of sens ry experience, as he himself emphasized: “In my work I have tried to ‘save’ sensory exp rience from theoretical misinterpretation and then to apply the regained understanding of the norm to pathological manifestations” (quoted in Spiegelberg 1972: 269). In 1935, he published his major work Vom Inn der Sine (The Primary World of Senses ), in which he Erwin Straps concentrated on the study of modern cognitive sciences and psychology since Descartes, Locke, and Hume. It starts again with a rigorous refutation of behaviorism, including a meticulous account of the framework of Pavlov’s famous experiments with dogs, and an analysis of the contradictions inherent to Pavlov’s own interpretations of these experiments. In Straps’s view, theories tracing back perception and cognition en Direly to sensory stimuli are not even adequate to determine the unity and wholeness of an object because sensory data are always given only in isolation. In contrast, Straps demonstrates that the individual pre-history and the secondary qualities of experience fundamentally determine how stimuli are experienced and reacted to as meaningful sig Gals. Straps further disputes that perception and experience occur within an organism: their place is the world itself in which human beings and animals move and behave.

On this basis, Straps develops his own theory of animal and human sensing ( Empfinden ) and experience as a “sympathetic communication” with the world that is always linked with the potential for movement. The following aspects form his basic as sumptions: the experiencing subject is neither a physiological reaction mechanism nor pure consciousness, but rather a temporalizing, living, and moving organism which exp riences events in the context of his life-history and attributes meaning to them according ly. Moreover, sensory experience is part of the individual’s “becoming,” meaning that it is never repeated identically but rather each phase points to others that precede and follow it. From this starting point, Straps reconstructs the formation of the unity of experiential space and time.

(p. 128) Straps consistently develops this conceptual scheme in critical delimitation from objectifying psychology that suggests the reduction of the phenomenal world to physical processes including those of the central nervous system. “It is man who thinks, not the brain” is his critical maxim that still applies today. He therefore vehement ly opposes any separation of the neuronal processes from the context of the living, expert Incing human subject. According to Straps, physiological analysis only explains the conj sons, yet not the reality of human experience and action. In a later essay, Straps proved to be far ahead of his time: The physiologist, who in the everyday world relates behavior and brain, actually makes three kinds of things into objects of his reflection: behavior, the brain as macroscopic formation, and the brain in its microscopic structure and biophysical processes. From the whole—the living organism—the inquiry descends to the parts: first of all to an organ—the brain—and finally to its histological elements.

Statements concerning the elementary processes acquire their proper sense only in reference back to the original whole.

(Straps 1982: 145)

Thus, the neuroscience with their analyses and findings are referred back to the super ordinate unity of the living, experiencing organism in its environment—an insight that an Erwin Straps ticipates the central elements of the current concepts of embodied and Inactive cogni son.

Aesthesiology of the Senses We have already demonstrated how sensory experience is vitally important not only for Straps’s psychology but also for his psychopathological works and this should be exam Dined in greater detail. Straps coined his approach of investigating sensory experience as anesthesiology, which will now be examined in greater detail.

According to Straps, perception is constituted by a sentient, bodily, or “pathic” moment on the one hand, and an active, intentional, or “Gnostic” (recognizing) moment on the oth er (Straps 1966a: 11ff.). The first conveys the Effective, physiognomic, and expressive properties of the perceptual field, thus establishing a basic connection or attunement be tween the bodily subject and the world. The second means objectifying perception, that is, grasping the object as such. It may also be understood as the intersubjective constitu son of reality through shared concepts which structure perception and turn it into a sen sus communes or “common sense.” It is thus also responsible for the normativity inherent in perception.

Pathic sensing can be understood as a form of sympathetic communication, as a living connection between “I” and “world” analogous to Minkowski’s “contact vitae ave la réalité.” This not only incorporates bodily sensations as the basis of every perception, but also the unity of sensing and motility, which Straps analyzed, in particular, by referring to the example of dance: animate of movement does’t occur in physical space as an inert frame; rather, it is always self-movement within a spatial field of the body comprising near and far, rhythmical dynamic qualities, temporal patterns ( Zeitgestalten ), and antis Bated possibilities or bodily protections. This unity of sensing and moving results in the communication of subject and world, “a reaching out beyond oneself, thus attaining to the Other; “it” is the (p. 129) basic phenomenon of sensory experience, a relationship that cannot be reduced to anything in the physical world” ( Straps 1958: 147).

On the other hand, in Gnostic objectifying perception the subject disengages itself from the immediacy of feeling. “A simple perception, which may be expressed by the sentence ‘This is an oak,’ determines and emphasizes” ( Straps 1956: 348; author’s trans.). In this determination the continuous flow of feeling is interrupted; we proceed from the unique Bess of the lived moment to the repeatability and the generality of knowledge. According to Straps, man’s upright posture is uniquely linked with Gnostic cognition for it is assoc ted with: • distance from the ground, which allows us to move about more freely, yet also imps es a condition of precarious balance; • distance from the objects that permits us to identify them as such; and Erwin Straps • distance from others, thus distinguishing them as their own centers of perspectivity so that, in common with them, we can constitute the meanings of things.

The pathic and Gnostic moments are involved in differing relations in every sensory per caption. The pathic aspect dominates in the oral senses (smell, taste), while the Gnostic or perceptual aspect is prevalent in the far senses (hearing, seeing). The sense of touch falls most of all in the middle of this polarity, since it constitutes the feeling of self and other (Straps 1930: 48). To a certain extent, both aspects are also antagonistic to one another: the Gnostic aspect, by intending the object as such, tends to objectify the perceived, and thus to inhibit the pathic aspect, that is, the expressive or Effective qualities to which the lived body is susceptible.

The unity of both aspects in perception now results in the dialectical relationship to the world: “Our relation to the Alton is a dialectical one, a contraposition or connection in separation” ( Straps 1969a: 33). Within the perceptual field we grasp the Alton, the Other, as Straps also defines the world of the subject; yet we grasp it in relationship to us, and ourselves in relation to it. Sensory experience is essentially bipolar, though not only as a relation of perceive and the Alton, but also as the polarity of the pathic and the Gnostic aspect within this relationship. “Whether the world is set more distant to us, in sharply contoured objectivity, or whether it approaches us by a loosening of boundaries... both, the specified and the blurred objectivity are alterations of communication” ( Straps 1956: 218f.; author’s trans.).

Landscape and Geographical Space Different spatialities of experience correspond to the pathic and Gnostic relationship with the world that Straps defines as “landscape” and “geographical” space (Straps 1956: 335ff.). Landscape implies what is a direct way of experiencing: it is centered on me and my body and sub-divided into near and far regions, centripetal and centrifugal directions, surrounded by the horizon and pervaded by references, impressions, and physiognomies. Pathic sensing is tied to the present relationship of the body with the impressions of the landscape; it “never ceases to be perspectival existence. The sensing does not gain a standpoint outside of the world of appearances” ( Straps 1956: 207f.; author’s trans.).

(p. 130) This original, perspectivist-subjective spatiality is suspended by the geographical space of aperspectival, objectifying knowledge: “If I want to recognize, to reach the things as they are in themselves, I have to break through my perspectival boundedness. I must gain distance from myself, dissolve the now, become identifiable within a general or der, that is, I must step out from the center, as it were, in which I am positioned in sens ing, and become alienated to myself” ( Straps 1956: 331; author’s trans.). Geographical space is abstracted from the bodily center; it forms in it only one position among many. We release ourselves in it from the direct relationship with that which is sensed and rec ognize it under a general aspect, namely, one that is accessible to others as well. Never Erwin Straps theless, this objectifying act is not merely reflective cognition, rather as the Gnostic mo Bent it merges with perception itself and becomes inherent to it. For that reason alone can we perceive things as such, and moreover, communicate with others about them with in a shared context and thus participate in the common world.

As becomes clear, Straps’s emphasis on sensory-sympathetic communication does not im ply an undifferentiated pre-reflective unity with the world: the human capacity for reflex son also incorporates the potential to project oneself in an imaginary position out of the primary bodily standpoint. Straps subsequently referred to this in an essay as “excarna son” or “ekbasis” (stepping out).

Phenomenological Psychopathology Applying these conceptions to psychopathology, we may distinguish two basic disturb Dances which are both caused by an uncoupling of the pathic and the Gnostic component of perception. As Straps notes, “the boundaries of the Alton are displaceable between the poles of intimacy and strangeness, of belonging and distance, of grasping and being grasped, of mastering and being overpowered. Such shifts of boundaries are experienced in the extreme pathological case, as derealization or depersonalization, as inspiration or alien influence” ( Straps 1969a: 47).

On the one hand, a lack or loss of the pathic aspect leads to a growing alienation from the perceived world, leaving the subject as a pure, detached observer; this amounts to a more or less severe derealization and depersonalization. According to Straps, this emerges due to a loss of sympathetic communication with the world. Without the pathic aspect what is perceived appears empty, unsubstantial, or dead. On the other hand, a disturbance of the Gnostic moment results in a subjectivization of perception, marked by a preponderance of expressive, overwhelming qualities in the perceptual field. This is the case, for example, in the threatening environments of agoraphobia, in drug intoxication, or in the initial stages of schizophrenia: here, the surroundings change into a puzzling, mysterious, and stage-like scenery, and the patient becomes the “center of the world.” The intersubjective constitution of reality is thus replaced by a radically subjectivist or idiosyncratic expert Once.

According to Straps, every relation to the Alton already implies the possibility to be influx Inced, overwhelmed, or pursued. This possibility is inhibited due to the distance that Gnostic perception entails. “If and when distantiation fails, then we are delivered up to the Alton, experiencing its power physiognomically as a growing menace” ( Straps 1969a: 77). In the state of psychosis there is a failure of Gnostic-determining distance, and the expressive characters of the surroundings come to the fore. The Other now becomes “a realm of (p. 131) the hostile, in which the patient finds himself all alone and defenseless, surrendered to a power which threatens him from all sides. The voices point at him, they have singled out and separated him from all others. He is certain that they mean him and no one else, he is not puzzled that his neighbor does not hear anything... In this world, there is no community, no discursive explanation”. Intersubjective comm Erwin Straps nication requires “the possibility to detach oneself from the impression, to reflect upon oneself, to place oneself within a general order, in which places are convertible” ( Straps 1958 l.c.). With the pathic aspect becoming autonomous, the possibility of changing per spective and thus, the intersubjectivity of perception is lost.

In normal experience the pathic and Gnostic moments of perception are not separable from one another. The table is not only seen, but also felt, its color and form are sensed in bodily resonance. Yet, it is equally perceived as a table in terms of its generally attribute able meaning which we have learn from others. The common sense merges as practical meaningfulness with the specific senses. Thus, it becomes possible that perception, through its merely subjective or pathic aspect, is oriented to the objects themselves. How ever, in the case of a weakening or disturbance of the Gnostic-intersubjective aspect, per caption can no longer present the object as such and instead gives us only its impression, its subjective appearance. It then lacks the solidity of the object, the character of the Al lon or reality. Thus, the surroundings are transformed into a stage-like scenery, an Duncan ny array of unreal, apparitional things that have questionable meaning. This uncanniness is the characteristic of the schizophrenic delusional mood (Wahnstimmung) at the onset of acute psychosis.

According to Straps, it is no longer possible for patients in psychosis to classify their ex periences in the general, intersubjective, or geographical space: When, for example, a psychotic girl reports that while shopping she noticed the glance of someone who she believed to be following her, yet without being able to tell where the person stood... then such experiences no longer have anything to do with discursive, intelligible, geographical space.... [The patients’] being-inthe-world is so modified that a bridge between the psychotic experience of space and geographical space can no longer be built, nor can a return be effected that would lead from geographical space to the spatial conditions in which the psycho ic experience takes place. In such cases of psychotic alteration it is characteristic for the hallucinations to appear in sensory fields for which normally the pathic mo Bent of affection is essential.

(Straps 1969a: 359)

Hence, the psychotic patient no longer arrives at the general, intersubjectively constitute ed object, or the Alton as a real counterpart. On the contrary, he or she remains enclosed in a subjectified, solipsistic perception. However, this psychopathological alteration of ex perience can only be explained on the basis of a phenomenological analysis of everyday perception.

Conclusion This short exposition of Erwin Straps’s elaborate work can certainly not offer a substitute for an in-depth reading of his major works. Nevertheless, it should have become obvious Erwin Straps that (p. 132) for Straps an understanding of psychopathological phenomena is always grounded upon the anthropological analysis of human experience: namely, in the forms of sensing, perception, self-movement, and communication that characterize the human lifeworld and its “basic axioms of everyday life”. Accordingly, his fundamental analysis of temporality in depression (Straps 1928/1966: 290ff.) is also based on an exam nation of the relationship of subjective or immanent and objective or world time: the slow-down of the subjective time of “becoming” up to a point of standstill leads to a de coupling from world time and conditions the superiority of the past in the depressive ex perience of guilt. This analysis subsequently became the starting point for numerous phe nomenological studies on the depressive experience of time.

Straps’s comprehensive analyses and results derived from the dialogue between his phe nomenological, anthropological, and clinical questions and research. And it was out of this dialogue “that Straps developed and elaborated his most comprehensive theoretical conception: the structure of the norm and pathology of I-World relations” ( Titelman 1976: 19). Seen in this light, psychiatry is never to be restricted to a medical model, either in terms of its knowledge or its action: “The object of psychiatric action is not primarily the brain, the body, or the organism; it should be integral man in the uniqueness of his Hindi visual existence as this discloses itself—independently of the distinction between health and sick—in existential communication” ( Straps 1969a: 2). To illuminate this fundamental communication with the world in its pre-reflective forms, and also to analyze its Visor Hers, represents a common thread that runs through Straps’s work as a whole, through his lifelong searches and Inquiries. Consequently, his basic attitude as a psychiatrist, re searcher, lecturer, and as a person is perhaps most appropriately summarized by the title of his own essay, “Man—A Questioning Being” ( Straps 1966a: 166–187). PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Kretschmer’s contributions to the field of psychopathology can be schematically reduced to two main themes: the first consists in the analysis of a particular form of delusion called “sensitive delusion of reference,” developed in his book Der Sensitive Beziehungswahn (The (p. 135) Sensitive Delusion of Reference ); the second concerns the construction of a constitutional typology, which attempts to identify, on the basis of the temperamental and physical-constitutional char acteristics of the subjects, all possible degrees and steps leading to the two major psy hoses: manic-depressive psychosis and schizophrenia.

The name of Robert Gaupp, Kretschmer’s teacher, is linked to an event of extraordinary interest—the criminal case of the elementary school teacher Ernst Wagner who was tor Dented by feelings of deep humiliation caused by his alleged acts of zoophilia, a persecu Cory delusion involving his fellow countrymen. This delusion led him in 1913 to set the en tire village of Müllhausen on fire, burning down houses and barns and killing eight men. Earlier that same night Wagner had killed his wife and four children in their sleep. Gaupp’s report, based on a thorough reconstruction of the psychopathological experience of the patient, led to the diagnosis of “paranoia” and to the resulting possibility of com muting the death sentence to imprisonment for life. The psychopathological analysis con dusted by Gaupp revolved around the idea that it was possible to reconstruct how, over the years, Wagner had developed his paranoid delusion. The idea of a “development” of personality, brilliantly expounded by Karl Jasper in his Allgemeine Psychopathologie, had allowed Gaupp to reach an understanding of the psychopathological pathways that had brought Wagner to delusion. Ernst Kretschmer’s contribution to the growth of psychopathological knowledge is based precisely on the possibility of extending Jasper’s concept of “development” (and therefore of comprehensibility) also to the field of “real” delusions, namely to the primary delusions which—according to Jasper’s theory —were impossible to comprehend in their genesis.

This is precisely the challenge that Kretschmer took up in order to contrast his views (and that of the Tübingen School) with those of Karl Jasper and Kurt Schneider, the most au thoritative representatives of the Heidelberg School, which had been the cradle of Ger man psychopathology. With the publication of Der Sensitive Beziehungswahn in 1918, Ernst Kretschmer Kretschmer attacked the nosology of psychoses. The sensitive delusion of reference is a particular clinical form of delusion characterized by systematized, non-bizarre, and nonhallucinatory delusions, which coincide with the paranoia described by Kraepelin. It is based on a “concentric relationship” in which the subject feels at the center of a threatening experience that envelops him, making his or her thoughts revolve around a key event that acts as a pivot for the emergence of the delusion. It is a key event ( Schlüs selerlebnis ) that, as Kretschmer puts it, “unlocks” the character, triggering the onset of psychosis. When a key event touches a particular point of a sensitive personality, the sub Sect experiences feeling of inadequacy, failure, humiliation, and shame. This, on Kretschmer’s view, is the real turning point for the onset of delusion. This key experience connects the sensitive personality with the emergence of delusion, which in order to take place requires two other ingredients in addition to the key event: a particular type of per Tonality (the sensitive personality) and a particular environment.

The sensitive personality is characterized by a dialectic relationship between two contra Victory tendencies: on the one hand, a sthenic disposition of character (ambition, pride, sense of superiority and power) and, on the other, an asthenic disposition (timidity, a hy persensitivity that can develop into social hyperesthesia, meticulousness, hesitation, shame, sense of inferiority and guilt, inhibition, secretiveness, and rigid morality). In the sensitive person, Kretschmer specifies, the asthenic tendency prevails. The asthenic side, however, is (p. 136) counteracted by a sthenic tendency. As a result, on the one hand, these subjects display an extraordinary weakness of mind and a delicate vulnerability, while, on the other, they nurture grand ambitions and show presumptuousness and stub bornness. They typically refrain from expressing their feelings and remain in a state of permanent tension, perhaps afflicted by the tormenting memories of a painful experience. The third ingredient of the triad is the environment. Due to their weakness and strong tendency toward introspection, these people tend to live an isolated life. When their suf Bering is intense or their constitution particularly unstable, a process of inversion takes place by which their anxieties and fears are projected onto the outside world, thereby taking the form of delusional beliefs. The sensitive person, for example, becomes con inced that his or her feeling of shame is universally known, and he or she is the object of derision and ridicule. The character of Hans Kohlhaas, depicted by Heinrich von Kleist in a famous novella, is analyzed by Kretschmer to illustrate how an honest sixteenth-century merchant, having suffered a series of injustices, could turn a state of shameful failure into a furious rage that induced him to terrorize for years the entire region of Saxony—in a manner similar to that which Gaupp described in the case of the elementary teacher Ernst Wagner.

The sensitive personality is characterized by a dialectic relationship between two contra Victory tendencies: on the one hand, a sthenic disposition of character (ambition, pride, sense of superiority and power) and, on the other, an asthenic disposition (timidity, a hy persensitivity that can develop into social hyperesthesia, meticulousness, hesitation, shame, sense of inferiority and guilt, inhibition, secretiveness, and rigid morality). In the sensitive person, Kretschmer specifies, the asthenic tendency prevails. The asthenic side, however, is (p. 136) counteracted by a sthenic tendency. As a result, on the one hand, these subjects display an extraordinary weakness of mind and a delicate vulnerability, while, on the other, they nurture grand ambitions and show presumptuousness and stub bornness. They typically refrain from expressing their feelings and remain in a state of permanent tension, perhaps afflicted by the tormenting memories of a painful experience. The third ingredient of the triad is the environment. Due to their weakness and strong tendency toward introspection, these people tend to live an isolated life. When their suf Bering is intense or their constitution particularly unstable, a process of inversion takes place by which their anxieties and fears are projected onto the outside world, thereby taking the form of delusional beliefs. The sensitive person, for example, becomes con inced that his or her feeling of shame is universally known, and he or she is the object of derision and ridicule. The character of Hans Kohlhaas, depicted by Heinrich von Kleist in a famous novella, is analyzed by Kretschmer to illustrate how an honest sixteenth-century merchant, having suffered a series of injustices, could turn a state of shameful failure into a furious rage that induced him to terrorize for years the entire region of Saxony—in a manner similar to that which Gaupp described in the case of the elementary teacher Ernst Wagner.

The fact is that in the clinical cases described by Kretschmer it is possible to identify pri Cary delusional experiences in Jasper’s sense or of typical delusional perceptions in Schneider’s sense. From this point of view, there is no longer any clear demarcation be tween the development of secondary delusion in abnormal personalities and primary delusion in paranoid schizophrenia. According to Kretschmer, in place of this clear dis tinction, a continuity between personality, primary delusions, and schizophrenia can be identified. Therefore, there is not a gap between personality and psychosis, as the School Ernst Kretschmer of Heidelberg had argued, but, on the contrary, a series of gradual steps. Thanks to Kretschmer’s careful clinical discussions and analyses, the sensitive delusion of reference has become the prototype for the psychological comprehension of some cases of paranoid psychoses. This comprehension requires a prolonged and systematic relationship with the patient. Kretschmer followed his paradigmatic cases for years, pushing Jasper’s method of “genetic understanding” to the extreme. This type of understanding does not aim at re living an isolated significant experience ( Erlebnis ), but rather at identifying an evolution ary path, a chain of concatenated experiences and meanings that run through the entire history and existential world of the patient.

Kretschmer’s Constitutional Typology Kretschmer’s constitutional typology was influenced by Bénédict Morel’s theory of “de generation” and by the French anthropological tradition which was based on the attempt to identify the bodily marks of the psychic involution sup posedly occurring in the transition from one generation to the other. Kretschmer, howev er, was not so much interested in the identification of the stigmata of “degeneration,” but rather in the transitional steps, at the bodily level, between character and psychosis. In Körperbau und Character (Physique and Character ) and in Medizinis che Psychologies (Medical Psychology ), Kretschmer described in papal lel the two sequences leading from a normal character to the two major psychoses: on the one side, cyclothymic (p. 137) and cycloid mental constitutions and eventually manic-de pressie psychosis; on the other, schizothymic and schizoid mental constitutions and eventually schizophrenia. The two major psychoses could be considered as the extreme development of certain normal types of character or as a sort of caricature of them. From this point of view, psychoses would not arise as something completely new and unexpect ed since between normality and pathology there would be a whole spectrum of gradual steps and nuances.

Kretschmer’s attempt to identify these transitional steps led him to formulate a constitu tonal typology based on the identification of two types of normal constitutions: a cy clothymic constitution and a schizothymic constitution. These two broad biotypological entities, combined in various proportions, include the great mass of ordinary varieties. A third type is represented by individuals of athletic and muscular constitution who are characterized by a tenacious and sticky temperament. This group was later brought in the leptsomic constitutional type.

Each constitutional type, however, is not characterized by a single temperament, but by a contrasting pair of features. As a result, individuals with a mental schizothymic constitu son are physically “leptosomic” (cylindrical trunk, elongated figure, thin chest, thin shoulders, long neck, slender bones and muscles), while, psychologically, they are charac terized by what Kretschmer calls “psychaesthetic proportion,” that is, a balanced Bela tionship between two contradictory tendencies: hyperesthesia and sensitivity on the one hand, and Effective anesthesia and coldness-dullness on the other. These two tendencies Ernst Kretschmer coexist side by side without eliminating each other. Individuals with a cyclothymic consti tuition are physically “pyknic” (stocky, with short extremities, rotund figure, vivid com Flexion, large circumference of the head, trunk and abdomen, thin and narrow shoulders, tendency to develop early baldness), while, psychologically, they are characterized by a “diathetic proportion,” that is, a balance between two antinomic Effective tendencies: eu phobic exaltation and joviality-enthusiasm on the one hand, sadness and despair-discour agement on the other. The athletic type is physically robust (muscular, trapezoidal trunk, broad shoulders, slender legs) and, psychologically, he is characterized by an Effective viscosity centered on the antinomic couple torpidity-explosiveness.

The above characteristics gradually emerge along the path that leads from cyclothymic constitution to manic-depressive psychosis, and from schizothymic constitution to schizo phrenia. For example, the schizoid person, writes Kretschmer, is not alternately hypersensitive or cold, but is both at the same time and in different de Crees, so much so that it is possible to outline a continuous line running from what he calls the Hölderlin type (hypersensitive, fragile, excitable) up to those cold, hard subjects that have fallen prey to a real dementia praecox (schizophrenia) and wander in a corner of the asylum like obtuse beasts. The “psychaesthetic proportion” is defined precisely by the degree in which hypersensitivity and coldness mingle in the individual subject. Such proportion, however, should not be taken as static or fixed once and for all, since it under goes significant fluctuations in relation to age and the vicissitudes of life.

The conclusions drawn by Kretschmer’s constitutional studies could not be accepted by Jasper, who believed in a clear-cut differentiation between the area of normal psychic life and that of psychotic mental life. If a relationship exists between schizoid personality and schizophrenia, Jasper argued, this relationship is to be understood in terms of a gap rather than a gradual shift (Jasper 1959: 645). Kretschmer’s descriptions—Jasper wrote —are beautifully wrapped in a pseudo-exact scientific coating that creates confusion be cause it stems (p. 138) from a mixture of different methods. Kretschmer’s fundamental er ror, according to Jasper, lay in his hypostatization, namely in the automatic transform son of ideas into entities. It is intuitively correct to argue that a thin body with long ex tremities and narrow chest is not inhabited by a jovial and cheerful soul, or that a large body with short extremities is not inhabited by an arid and virtuous one. This is a matter of intuitive physiognomic thinking about human nature and, as such, it does not require further investigation. However, to turn this insight into a scientific law of causality is quite a different matter. In fact, many counterexamples refute it. At most, one could speak of a correlation, as it happens with many phenomena that have no real affinity with each other. Moreover, Jasper concluded, physiognomies is, after prophecy, the most Calla sous art ever invented by an eccentric mind (Jasper 1959: 268).

Empirical research has subsequently proved Jasper right and demonstrated the unsus tainability of Kretschmer’s constitutional typology. However, beyond this particular as Sect, the fact remains that even in Kretschmer’s constitutional typology it is possible to detect a dialectical principle privileging the understanding of the transitional forms and the paths leading to psychosis over the study of the rigid clinical forms established by Ernst Kretschmer nosology. Kretschmer’s psychodynamic approach (which, however, does not draw on psy choanalysis) represents a fundamental contribution to the understanding of the path to psychosis.

Beyond Primary Delusions In conclusion, Kretschmer’s analysis of the sensitive delusion of reference has been, in the words of Martin Roth, the first authoritative challenge to the dichotomy between comprehensible phenomena and “developments” on the one side, and incompre Sensible phenomena and “processes” on the other. In this sense, Kretschmer’s dynamic (but not psychoanalytic) pathogenetic model has fractured—like a Trojan horse—the dog ma of the incomprehensibility of delusions and has set an example for the study of a wider range of delusions. Nonetheless, Kretschmer has been widely criticized and ac used of daring too much and, at the same time, too little. He dared too little in the sense that he excluded any reference to psychoanalytic approaches (despite its model being highly dynamic) and confined to one specific form of delusion the challenge to the dogma of incomprehensibility. On the other hand, he dared too much in the eyes of those who, like Jasper and Schneider, embraced the assumption of primary incomprehensibility of delusions and considered the clinical situations he described as personality develop Bents. These criticisms, however, were oblivious to the fact that in the cases of sensitive delusion of reference described by Kretschmer many primary delusions and many firstrank Schneiderian symptoms had been amply documented. What has happened—we may ask—to Kretschmer’s contributions to psychopathology? While the somatic-based consti tutional type now belongs to the history of psychiatry, the attention to the comprehensi Ability of the paths leading to the area of major psychoses remains an unavoidable point of reference for those who refuse to give up the attempt to introduce the dimension of sub jectivity and understanding into the area of psychosis. This attempt is particularly imper ant at a time when mainstream psychiatry is struggling to get rid of any dimension that cannot (p. 139) be described in objective terms and measured quantitatively or behavioral ly. Kretschmer’s contribution was immediately picked up by another great psychopatholo gist, Eugène Minkowski, and elaborated further in close relationship with the approach taken in the same years by Dimmer and by the Scandinavian school of psychiatry in the development of the concept of psychogenic psychosis (Dimmer 2003; Strömgren 1974; Retterstøl 1978; Dimmer 2003). The Open Dialogue method in the treatment of psy hoses, developed by Jaakko Seikkula in the past decades in Finland and now widespread across the globe, represents a tentative therapeutic application of Kretschmer’s dynamic-comprehensive approach to psychosis. In addition, the “basic symptoms model,” developed in Germany since the 1970s, has successfully adopted the idea of a continuum in the development of schizo phrenic psychoses in particular. After KlosterköOtter (1988 ) successfully developed the ser ial connections model in order to explain the first-rank Schneiderian symptoms, one could argue—in homage to Kretschmer’s sensitive delusion of reference—that every primary delusion is now largely understandable.

Ernst Kretschmer # Acknowledgment This entry should have been written together with Professor Arnaldo Ballerina who, unfor tunately, passed away before we could get to work. In illustrating Kretschmer’s thought, I can only gratefully recall the passion and the clinical and methodological rigor with which Arnaldo Ballerina introduced me to the study of psychiatry and psychopathology. Bibliography Cocks G.. Psychotherapy in the Third Reich: The Göring Institute. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie, 7. underänderte Auflage. Heidel berg: Stringer. Klee E.. Das Personenlexikon zum Britten Reich. Wer war was vor und Bach 1945, 2. Auflage. Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Verlag. KlosterköOtter J.. Basissymptome und Endphaenomene der Schizophrenia. Heidel berg: Stringer. Kraepelin E.. Psychiatric. Leipzig: Barthes. Kretschmer E.. Der sensitive Beziehungswahn. Berlin: Stringer. Kretschmer E.. Körperbau und Character. Berlin: Stringer. Kretschmer E.. Medizinische Psychologies. Stuttgart: Theme. Kretschmer E.. Gestalten und Gedanken. Stuttgart: Theme. Magnon fifth.. Des anomalies, des aberrations et des perversions sexuelles. Paris: A. Delahaye, E. Lecrosnier. Morel fifth. B.. Traité des Dégénérescences. Bailliére: Paris. Müleer R.. Wage zum Rum. Miltärpsychiatrie im Zweiten Weltkrieg. Das Beispiel Marburg. Köln: PapyRossa. Retterstøl N.. “The Scandinavian Concept of Reactive Psychosis, Schizophreniform Psychosis and Schizophrenia.” Psychiatric clinic 11: 180–187. (p. 140) Roth M.. “New and Old Concepts in Psychiatric Diagnosis and Classifica son: A Commentary of Recent Developments.” Neurologia, psichiatria, science mane. At ti Congress Nazionale Bella Sovietà Italian di Psichiatria 1: 21–38. Seikkula J. and Olson M.. “The Open Dialogue Approach to Acute Psychosis: Its Po tics and Micropolitics.” Family Process 42: 403–418.

Ernst Kretschmer Seikkula J. and Arnkil T.. Dialogical Meetings in Social Networks. London: Karnac. Strömgren E.. “Psychogenic Psychoses.” In S. Kirsch and M. Shepherd (eating disorders.), Themes and Variations in European Psychiatry, pp. 97–120. Bristol: John Wright and Sons. Strömgren E.. “Psychogene Psychoses.” Nervenarzt 57: 88–95. Dimmer A.. Psychogenic Psychoses. Adelaide: Adelaide Academic Press.

Mario Ross Mons Department of Humanistic Studies, University of Urbino Ernst Kretschmer Seikkula J. and Arnkil T.. Dialogical Meetings in Social Networks. London: Karnac. Strömgren E.. “Psychogenic Psychoses.” In S. Kirsch and M. Shepherd (eating disorders.), Themes and Variations in European Psychiatry, pp. 97–120. Bristol: John Wright and Sons. Strömgren E.. “Psychogene Psychoses.” Nervenarzt 57: 88–95. Dimmer A.. Psychogenic Psychoses. Adelaide: Adelaide Academic Press.

Mario Ross Mons Department of Humanistic Studies, University of Urbino Hubert's Tellenbach Hubert's Tellenbach Stefan Micali The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Hubert's Tellenbach’s research on phenomenological psychiatry is characterized by both erudite scholarship and philosophical brilliance. Tellenbach’s most important contribu sons to psychiatry are to be found in four different areas of research: 1) the methodology of the psychopathological approach; 2) the study of melancholia; 3) the phenomenology of atmosphere and mood; and 4) an intercultural investigation of fatherhood. This chapter focuses primarily on the first two areas, although some aspects related to the third area are also mentioned. The last part of the chapter highlights the importance of Tellenbach’s analysis of the melancholic type to current research on depression. Tellenbach’s invest Cation can contribute to clarifying the connections between our society based on perform Dance and optimatization and the alarming relevance of depression in our contemporary society.

Keywords: phenomenological psychiatry, endogeneity, types melancholics, phenomenology of mood, depression # Introduction THERE are authors belonging to the tradition of phenomenological psychopathology who have had a major impact on psychiatric research: Karl Jasper, Ludwig Binswanger, and Eugène Minkowski are probably the first names that come to mind. Yet, there are also au tors in this tradition who have not received the attention their outstanding work de serves. Hubert's Tellenbach belongs to the latter category. Despite the fact that his most important work— Melancholy —has been translated into more than twelve languages —for example, Italian, French, and Japanese—the appreciation of the rich Bess of his work is still inadequate. Furthermore, Tellenbach’s research remains to be dis covered in the English-speaking world. Tellenbach’s most important contributions to psy chiatry are to be found in four different areas of research: 1) the methodology of the psy chopathological approach; 2) the study of melancholia; 3) the phenomenology of atmosphere and mood; and 4) an intercultural investigation of fatherhood (Tellenbach 1976, 1978, Hubert's Tellenbach 1979). In this chapter, I will focus primarily on the first two areas, although some aspects related to the third area will also be mentioned.

Hubert's Tellenbach, born in Cologne in 1914, studied medicine and philosophy from 1933 to 1938 in Mönchengladbach, Königsberg, and in Freiburg im Breisgau. In Freiburg, he attended Martin Heidegger’s courses, which had a profound influence on his approach to psychopathology. He received a doctoral degree in both philosophy and medicine. In 1956, he started working at the University of Heidelberg where he became a professor in the Department of Psychiatry. Tellenbach was clinical director of the Department of Psy chopathology from 1971 until his retirement in 1979. He continued working and publish ing material until he died in 1994.

(p. 142) Methodological Reflections: The Field of # Endogeneity A basic assumption of phenomenological psychiatry is that no mental illness can be de Ascribed or treated without a thorough analysis of subjective experience. Phenomenology cal descriptions of psychopathological disturbances remain the irreplaceable reference point of all empirical studies. Psychopathological disturbances cannot, for example, be re Educed to subpersonal, biological symptoms. German and French phenomenological psy chopathology even questions the legitimacy of the term “symptom” with respect to psy chiatric disorders. The term “symptom” in a medical context has a specific semiotic status: it is a sign referring to an occurring process that is not immediately visible or accessible. It implies an inferential process: we can infer the objective existence of a disease in terms of a pathological dysfunction to which we have no direct access from the manifestations of several symptoms. According to Tellenbach, psychopathological appearances are sens strict not symptoms. They do not refer to anything else. The feeling of a lack of feeling cannot be conceived as a symptom of depression; it is rather a primal manifestation of the disturb Dance, that is, an essential characteristic ( Merkmal ) of the phenomenon as such. The fun damental categorical distinction between symptoms and characteristics should not be overlooked in the psychiatric context since it reveals an implicit reductionist. Further more, there is no “single” manifestation that can be clearly isolated from the other disturb Dances in psychopathological disorders. Of course, it is not only legitimate, but also nec Pessary, to distinguish between single manifestations for diagnostic purposes. However, this distinction is not rooted in separable aspects of the phenomena as such. The globality of the transformation cannot be reduced to a single psychological aspect or to a physical disturbance. Each manifestation of melancholia is always representative of an overall al Aeration of the human being.

Tellenbach introduces the notion of endogeneity in order to analyze the specific charac teristics of psychopathological disturbances. The study of endogeneity aims at overcome ing the classical paradigm of understanding the relationship between mind and body. Psy choanalysis insists on the psychogenic relevance of unconscious dynamics causing Hubert's Tellenbach changes at the bodily level. Biological psychiatry emphasizes the dependence of mental states on somatic processes of biochemical nature. Tellenbach introduces the notion of endogeneity in order to escape this rigid alternative between two opposite and reverse forms of causality. The notion of endogeneity intends to address a field of phenomena concerning the globality of subjective life: “it is the human being in Soto which is trans formed” ( Tellenbach 1980: 28). Bin Kimura’s concept of Ki refers precisely to the global alteration that marks the atmospheric character of the encounter with a per son with schizophrenia. It is noteworthy that endogeneity is not related only to pathology cal phenomena. The sphere of the endogenous can find its paradigmatic exemplification in the different stages of life: infancy—childhood—adolescence—adulthood—old age. These stages are neither attributable to the personal, psychological characteristics nor could they be reduced to subpersonal, biological processes. Each critical phase of mach ration is a turning point of the whole human being. Each phase is incomparable with the other and constitutes a global configuration. The notion of “Tendon” refers to this global configuration. The transformation (p. 143) of this dimension is therefore defined as en dokinesis. As Blankenburg writes: “Neither as the personal moment of an inwardness nor the personal moment of the personal biological, does it (the Tendon) unfold in the Essen ital lawful regularities of life” (Blankenburg 1964: 184). Psychopathological disturbances like the melancholic or schizophrenic condition can be fully understood only in light of the notion of endogeneity. But other experiences too, such as the spiritual encounter in Deli ion or art, can signify the beginning of a new life: they can transform the person radical ly.

Another crucial aspect of endogenity is to be found in the “kinesis” or the inner motion. This endogenous aspect of kinesis is particularly visible in the inhibition of the élan vital emphasized by Gebsattel with regard to the melancholic condition: a vital retardation of both the subjective flow and bodily movements occurs in melancholia with a loss of the af fictive resonance of the surroundings. The rhythm of life tends to be suspended. The self is just a witness to a frozen life. The melancholic patient is not able to feel anything, not even sadness. He is also incapable of entering in relation to his own inner death: “This suffering is endogenously inflected, is strange, incomprehensible, mon Estrous, deformed, even perverted suffering, a pathic apathy as it were” ( Tellenbach 1980: 26). That melancholia has an endogenous character is shown by the fact that it does not leave traces in the inner life, once it has disappeared (Tellenbach 1980: 26).

Another crucial aspect of endogenity is to be found in the “kinesis” or the inner motion. This endogenous aspect of kinesis is particularly visible in the inhibition of the élan vital emphasized by Gebsattel with regard to the melancholic condition: a vital retardation of both the subjective flow and bodily movements occurs in melancholia with a loss of the af fictive resonance of the surroundings. The rhythm of life tends to be suspended. The self is just a witness to a frozen life. The melancholic patient is not able to feel anything, not even sadness. He is also incapable of entering in relation to his own inner death: “This suffering is endogenously inflected, is strange, incomprehensible, mon Estrous, deformed, even perverted suffering, a pathic apathy as it were” ( Tellenbach 1980: 26). That melancholia has an endogenous character is shown by the fact that it does not leave traces in the inner life, once it has disappeared (Tellenbach 1980: 26).

Tellenbach emphasizes the affinity between the concept of endogeneity and Heidegger’s notion of thrownness ( Geworfenheit ) developed in Being and Time. At first sight it seems legitimate to conceive of research on endogeneity as a more detailed analysis of Heidegger’s notion of facticity. On further examination, this interpretation be comes problematic. The concept of endogeneity is different from Heidegger’s notion of Geworfenheit given its ecological and cosmic character: endogeneity refers to a vivid ex perience of a lived body in an ecological and social context within the life-world. Teller bate stresses the intertwinement between endogeneity and the rhythms of nature, the impact of the rhythms of the day, of the months on our life, the “incorporation of the hu man life in his environment” ( Tellenbach 1980: 23). A typical character of endogeneity Hubert's Tellenbach manifests itself in the rhythm of vital activities. The positive manifestations of vital rhythms are the periodic processes of waking, sleeping, being active, resting, regularity of eating, drinking, suckling or nursing, the menstrual cycle, etc. The notion of endogene ity is conceived as the root of all structures that constitute us as living organisms, such as sexual orientations, temperaments, or pre-dispositions of character as influenced by in hesitance factors. The dimension of endogeneity goes beyond the categorical framework articulated in Being and Time where the organism is considered only in negative terms, and the embodied aspects are not adequately considered. Tellenbach’s ecological para dim—in his terminology, Undo-cosmos-genetic paradigm—is closer to holistic approaches developed by Kurt Goldstein or Victor von Weissätier. Endogeneity is prior to the spiritual and existential dimension, but it is also strongly influenced by our projects, decisions, emotional responses, and spiritual attitudes to the situation. Further more, social interaction can have a crucial impact on the endogenous dimension. It is not possible to find in Tellenbach’s analysis any negative or dismissive approach to common sense or to daily life in the life-world, which is reduced to inauthenticity in forms of deject son in Being and Time. The value of Tellenbach’s integrative approach is particularly ap parent in clinical diagnosis. It allows one to detect the complex interplay between biology cal processes, endogenous modifications, and existential attitudes. His research on types melancholics is an exemplary expression of his integrative approach.

(p. 144) The Types Melancholics The constellation of includence and remanence are the essential features for understand ing the pathogenesis of the endogenetic transformation in the melancholic condition. These constellations are not causes of depression but they could rather be conceived as its precondition.

Let us first explain the fundamental notion of includence. The melancholic type tends to ward an over-identification with fixed social roles: “The melancholic’s conscience is, in the first instance, a guardian of the established orders” ( Tellenbach 1980: 122). Not mea sure and proportion, but orderliness “prevails” in the melancholic type. Everything has to be in the right place according to pre-established standards: “Nothing is allowed to inter fair that would change the course of things, nothing unexpected, unforeseen” (Teller bate 1980: 123). Everything has to go as expected. “It is characteristic when a woman, who later became melancholic, reports that the morning after her husband’s death she took her laundry and began ironing—‘for the sake of order’ ” ( Tellenbach 1980: 123). No contingency, chance, or ambiguity is allowed. Invasive anxiety is connected with each novelty. The self-enclosure within a fixed order allows the subject to avoid the confront son with everything out of the ordinary: the accident and the possibility of guilt are in this sense particularly threatening. The person identifies him/herself with a specific nevi ronment (such as his/her own house), with specific activities (e.g. work performance), or with a symbiotic relation with the other. This exclusive “self-inclusion-into and self-under standing-out of a given order” ( Tellenbach 1980: 120) is a constitutive feature of the melancholic type: Includence. The patient is self-enclosed within orders whose bound Hubert's Tellenbach Aries he/she is no longer able to transcend. Once unexpected circumstances, such as mov ing houses or a disease, interrupt the routine of the given order, a crisis leading to severe depression can appear.

Remanence signifies the inescapable feeling of remaining behind oneself, especially with regard to one’s own duties, tasks, and performances. The core of remanence is being in debt: “The essential form of such a condition of being in default to the self-demand is in variably being in debt: being in default to one’s own demand for performance, or being in debt with regard to ethical and religious orders” ( Tellenbach 1980: 148). Each unfinished task is felt as a mistake and source of guilt: “ debt is already cuppa” ( Tellenbach 1980: 149). If the melancholic type accomplishes a good performance with a small imperfection, he tends to experience this imperfection as a personal catastrophe: “The melancholic type resembles a person who wishes to eradicate in advance all possible guilt, who pays as it were beforehand for what he has not yet taken, who sees himself as already in de fault when it is not even possible” ( Tellenbach 1980: 151). He simply tries to accomplish the impossible. Human existence entails an ineradicable excess of possibilities over our capacity to actualize them, which implies a difficult confrontation with the finitude of one’s own resources, time, and talents. The melancholic type is not able to live with the sense of indebtedness inherent to the human condition. He tries to eradicate all sense of indebtedness. Guilt becomes omnipresent in an existence that wants nothing more than to avoid this guilt. Even fate—like unexpected sickness—is experienced as guilt or, at least, is an occasion for asking about the person’s own wrongdoing: “Wherever anything fateful impinges on his order, the question occurs to him: How am I to blame for that?” ( Tellenbach 1980: 153; translation modified).

(p. 145) A typical situation in which the constellation of includence and remanence can emerge is work performance. A sense of debt and guilt with regard to one’s performance is the most common feature in this sense: Includence is the situation of constriction, within which the melancholic type is no longer able to surpass himself in the mode of his possible achievement, although for him, in terms of his order, everything depends on this—and this is the situation too in which he cannot on the other hand remain. Let us sketch once more the model of such situational change: a topological melancholic succeeds in some out standing accomplishment. What happens when demands are unduly increased or his powers diminish? He wants by all means to get the job out of the way because his norm of responsibility requires that he does not remain obligated; but at the same time he is controlled by emphasis on accuracy because of his predisposition on orderliness.

(Tellenbach 1980: 146)

Such a situation is not bearable in the long term: it leads to a crisis. He has to change himself—reducing the accuracy in order to match the new requirements. This example paradigmatically shows the interrelation between includence and remanence. The two Hubert's Tellenbach constellations always appear together although remanence (or includence) can alternate ly be the dominant one in the specific case.

Tellenbach’s approach can be termed kinetic typology, since it considers the genesis and the development of several situational experiences lived by the person. The investigation of the sequence of the situations detects the pathogenetic aspects. Even if the theme of the self-accusation remains the same, a radical change of the way of experiencing can oc cur: “the self no longer manages its theme but is rather managed by it,” “the self no longer has or possesses its theme, but is possessed by it” ( Tellenbach 1980: 173). These strange formulations tend to do justice to the strangeness of the phenomena. They intend to refer to the coherent deformation of the experience according to which the self is not capable of intentionally addressing the theme in a coherent and consistent way. The theme has become so overwhelming that no intentional content can emerge. The patio logical aspect lies in the Effective disproportion and exaggeration of a single event in the life-story, which results in an unknown despair. Despair is not to be understood as a lack of hope. It is rather a situation in which the subject oscillates between different possibili ties without being able to make a decision. It is stuck with a self-contradiction with no way out. Despair is in this sense “remaining trapped in the doubt” (1980: 165). The self is no longer able to bear the self-contradictory tendencies inherent to the constellation of includence and remanence.

Conclusion I wish to conclude by emphasizing the importance of Tellenbach’s analyses of the types melancholics in order to understand the alarming relevance of depression in our con temporary liquid society. Subjectivity forms itself in social interaction, in specific matrices of praxis, discourses, gestures, and power-Bela sons. Foucault introduces the term “dispositif” to refer to this kind of matrix. Tellenbach’s research concerning the types melancholics can shed light on (p. 146) an essential feature of our liquid society: the cult of performance. The cult of performance has in itself the seed of depression. Liquid society requires an infinite malleability and flexibility. The individual cannot adjust himself to the given conditions since these conditions change “faster than it takes the ways of acting to consolidate into habits and routines” ( Badman 2005: 2). The principle of perpetual training imposes itself in all areas: “One is never finished with anything” ( Deleuze 1990: 23).

The liquid society combines and enhances the two tendencies of types melancholics (includence and remanence) in a particular way. On the one hand, a minute-by-minute plan of the entire process of work performance is required. The time schedule is defined in increasingly specific detail. No deviation is tolerated. On the other hand, the individual has to show initiative, open-mindedness, and creativity. He or she is required to be innov Dative, ready to develop new approaches, improving the efficiency of the process. Accord ing to the infinite process of capitalistic self-optimization, work performances always have Hubert's Tellenbach to go beyond the previous outcomes. Hartmut Rosa considers the notion of acceleration as a key concept for understanding essential features of our post-disciplinary society. The acceleration concerns the whole dimension of social interaction: the con Gumption of commodities, the telematic communication, performance at work, leisure ac tivities, and so on. Under such circumstances the individual can easily feel inadequate. Deleuze argues that the contemporary human being is no longer the enclosed human be ing, but “the human being in debt [ l’Somme endetté ]” (Deleuze 1990: 247). Recent socio logical and philosophical research from different areas confirms this conclusion.

Tellenbach’s research on the melancholic type can contribute to clarifying the conned sons between our society based on performance and optimatization and the phenomenon of depression. The attitudinal constellation of remanence and incl Fence is internal to the dispositif of the cult of performance typical of our liquid society where each person “must become for him or herself a business” ( Gore 2010: 21). Each person has to become “a form of fixed capital that needs to be continually reproduced, modernized, broadened, and recapitalized.... She/he must be her/his own producer, her/ his own employer and her/his own seller, imposing upon herself/himself whatever con straits are necessary in order to ensure the viability and competitiveness of the business which she/he is” ( Gore 2010: 21). Being bound, almost condemned, to high performativity leads to the feeling of being left behind. If under specific negative circumstances the feel ing of being left behind reaches a threatening intensity, it can easily become pathogenic. PAGE_BREAK in Munich and later he returned to Germany as a visiting professor in Hei delberg. In a study of depersonalization written while in Munich he made a distinction between the self or I as acting agent and the self as object of reflection—a dis tinction he would pursue for many years. Throughout his career he has published much in the area of phenomenological psychiatry, often making the connection with Japanese Zen Buddhism. He has also translated into Japanese works by psychiatrists and philosophers such as Heidegger, Binswanger, Frank, von Wei'säOcker, Tellenbach, Blankenburg, and El lenberger.

Although Kimura wrote on many aspects of psychiatry and psychopathology, his work on schizophrenia is his most intense, original, and widely known. It is on that work that I will focus in this chapter.

Everyday Experience Inasmuch as in his study of the self-disturbance of schizophrenia Kimura focuses on cer Cain dimensions of normal self-experience, and in fact understands schizophrenia as a pathology (p. 149) of such experience, it will be fruitful to begin with a description of everyday self-experience. First, there is a distinction between the self in ac son and the self as object of reflection. If I am engaged in an activity, my awareness of myself while doing something is different from my thinking about that activity after it has been completed. In Merleau-Monty’s terms, this is the distinction between pre-reflective or operative consciousness and reflective consciousness. Of course in normal experience we constantly veer from one to the other. A tennis player readily alternates between be ing totally involved in the play at one moment and quickly reflecting on it a moment later (e.g. “I should have pulled that serve more to his backhand”). We can think of the same distinction in the language of narrative theory of the self. The developed narrative is a product of reflection, but there is also the narrative quality of life as lived. If, for instance, part of my life narrative is my life as a parent, I might be implicitly and non-reflectively aware of this while doing something with my child.

A second distinction in everyday self-experience is that between oneself as an individual subject and oneself as a member of a community of selves. This plays out in many ways. First, even if I am in a private train of thought, I am not thinking in a private language; I am participating in a language that is shared by millions of others. And further, this pri ate thought is often a private conversation, peopled by many imagined others, some of my direct acquaintance, others not. And finally, in real contacts with other people, I am more clearly involved in a shared consciousness of my contemporaries, whether that is a conversation with a few or with a community.

Finally, we must attend to the bodily self, the manner in which, whatever I am doing, I am acting as an embodied self. The tennis player is a perfect example of an embodied self— less aware of his body when his game is going well, more aware of it when a sprain inter fairs with his play.

Kimura Bin We take our embodiment and the other dimensions of selfhood so much for granted that we are usually unaware of them. In this range of normal self-experiences, we automatical ly keep track of the fact that these various selves are all oneself. Whether I am engaged in an activity or thinking about it, whether I am engaged in private thought or having a con versation, whether I am solving a mathematical problem in my head or absorbed in phys cal, sexual activity—in all of these manifestations of my selfhood I am effortlessly aware that they are all me. I take their integration for granted and generally don’t give it a second’s thought.

There are occasions when I am made aware of one or another aspect of selfhood. I trip on the tennis court and am aware that my bruised knee interferes with my play. My cover Cation partner reminds me that I am not listening to him because I’m absorbed in my own thought.

There are also occasions when an aspect of myself feels like not me, feels other. I look in the mirror and for an instant think, is that me? I overhear another person talking about me and struggle to accept that the person she’s talking about is really me.

These are minor breaks in the seamless continuity of selfhood. What Kimura will tell us is that in schizophrenia such breaks are not minor, they define schizophrenic experience. What we observe in schizophrenia is a failure of self-integration.

A Central Theme Kimura investigates schizophrenia from a variety of perspectives. There is, however, a central theme that permeates the texts, a distinction between what he calls the subject Dive, Poetic (p. 150) self and the objective, noematic self, and the failure in schizophrenia to maintain the balance between the two. The terms are those of Edmund Husserl, noema (and noematic) referring to the object of consciousness (in perception, e.g. a tree), noesis (and Poetic) referring to the process of knowing or perceiving (I actually see the tree from a particular angle, in a particular “profile”). Kimura cautions that his use of these Husserlian categories is not necessarily faithful to Husserl: That which I call the Poetic-noematic relationship is different from what Husserl describes with these same terms. The Poetic qualifies for me as mode of expert Once that cannot be limited to the subjective or objective. It is in no way a matter of a substance. It resembles an atmosphere, but with the difference that it can’t be understood as a quasi-object. Our real I is experienced as a Poetic event, it is not visible as an object. In contrast, the image of the I or self that is the object of con sciousness, as all that which is constituted as an intentional object of conscious Bess, is noematic.

(Pélicier 1992: 188)

Kimura Bin In what follows we will trace Kimura’s elaboration of this distinction and its disturbance in schizophrenia from a variety of perspectives. The first I will label a Husserlian perspex Dive because it develops his use of the Poetic dimension as just described—a reflective moment within the subjective self.

Husserlian Perspective In his “Reflection and Self in the Schizophrenic” Kimura, citing a Japan ese colleague Nagai Mari, invokes Husserlian terminology to distinguish two types of re Election: the first, a reflection after the act, in which the subject’s reflection makes of the act a noematic object; the second, a simultaneous reflection that accompanies the act, and that remains entirely within the Poetic sphere. The second would be like the tennis player observing his play while engaging in it. “One could say that a subjective self here accompanies another self no less subjective and observes it constantly ‘from behind’. There is no objective, noematic self involved here; a sole Poetic self splits into two simul taneous ‘moments’ which occupy alternatively the places of seeing and seen, and which nonetheless remain subjective-Poetic” ( Kimura 1992a: 118). Kimura points out that simul taneous reflection is quite difficult for the average person, and carried out only with great effort and some confusion (the tennis player would lose track of his play if reflecting on it while playing).

Kimura suggests that while simultaneous reflection is rare in normal experience, it is common in schizophrenic experience (and in that way makes it hard for the person with schizophrenia to pay attention to what he is doing). For this to result in disturbed self-ex perience, Kimura speculates on another feature of simultaneous reflection. Recall that in simultaneous reflection there are two moments within the Poetic sphere: the observing subject and the observed subject. It may happen that one or the other of these may be ex perienced as alien, at which point the individual drifts into delusional psychosis. If the re Electing self is experienced as foreign, the result is paranoia (“I’m being looked at”); if the reflected-upon self is experienced as foreign, while still within the subject, the result is a delusion of one’s mind being occupied by a foreign source (“I’m controlled by the compute er planted in (p. 151) my head”). In describing a patient’s confusion about what is inside and what is outside his mind, Kimura writes of one patient: This patient’s words clearly suggest that the “I” or “self” as an entity remains identifiable from outside and recognizable as an object (I’m so and so, he says; he speaks of things being “into me,” “with me,” and “within myself”; he refers to “my hand”). By contrast, the personal subject or agent of this I-for-myself is no longer itself but has been altered by what he refers to as a “topological translocation,” a “psycho-making” and manipulation by “Dr. M.”

(Kimura 2001: 332)

Kimura Bin # Linguistic Perspective In another paper, “Pathology of the Immediate”, Kimura reflects on schizo ophrenic disturbance from a linguistic perspective. Here he returns to the basic distinct son between the subjective (Poetic) I and the objective (noematic) self. He now distin gushes the self in action—the subjective I—pre-linguistic and unmediated through lan gauge, from the reflected-upon self, mediated through language. The acting I is immedi ate and fugitive in a manner that escapes articulation but at the same time, very readily flows into a secondary reflection that exists only as a mediated, articulated, noematic self.

Kimura begins the paper with a recognition that daily experience is almost entirely Jedi ted through language: “[I]n daily life we experience everything as such or such thing. Thus the structure of language infiltrates itself profoundly into that ‘as such’ ” ( Kimura 1992b: 129). Importantly, we experience ourselves in the same mediated manner. When the I of immediate experience becomes aware of itself as I, it has already been trans formed into an objective I or self, mediated through language. Kimura writes: “As for the I, which seems apparently the most immediately given, this also, when it becomes con scions of itself as ‘I,’ is constituted equally as an experience mediated by a negative dif ferentiation that inserts itself between the ‘I’ that is in the process of becoming conscious and the ‘I’ that can be articulated in language, which latter is only the non-I for the mime date I” (Kimura 1992b: 132).

Kimura at times describes the subjective, unmediated I as an openness to the world prior to a separation of I and world, and at other times as function or action, a force that Berg son calls “ l’élan vital” and Nietzsche “the Will to Power.” Kimura refers to it as “the sub Sect itself as the vital ground of... self-consciousness,” in contrast to “the I that is repre Dented in human consciousness” ( Kimura 2001: 335), a corresponding objective, noematic sense of self. The subjective, vital I functions correctly, however, only when it is associate ed with the mediated, objective I. I act spontaneously, but always with a background sense that it is I, this particular self, that is acting. This need for the symbolized, media ed I does not imply a limitation or contamination of subjective experience but rather a need of the subjective I for its objectivized companion. The course of normal, everyday experience requires a balance between the two I’s, the purely subjective I and its object fixation in a symbolized, verbalized self—in Kimura’s words, that “ordinary spontaneity is determined as a Poetic I under the influence of the noematic self” ( Kimura 1992b: 134). An ordinary statement such as “I’m going to the store” implies that balance—“I am going to the store,” and “it is I and not another who is going to the store.”

(p. 152) The person with schizophrenia is not able to balance the two senses of self, the unmediated I and the objective self. Each needs the other, and when either is disordered, the other will also be disordered. A failure of unmediated vital activity will affect the abili ty to develop an adequate mediated, objective sense of self, and a failure to develop the latter will prevent the person with schizophrenia from feeling any strength or confidence in his ability to act or function adequately in the world.

Kimura Bin In this situation there is a failure in bridging the gulf between immediacy and mediation. When the natural split in the I is not mastered, a gulf remains between the subjective and objective selves. A person with schizophrenia may experience this gulf as difference. The unity of the self is broken and, as described in the previous section, one dimension of the self may be experienced as other than the self. Kimura discusses this experience of other Bess further in describing Blankenburg’s patient, Anne. Unable to ex perience her own subjectivity, and confusing the other person with the other within her, “the intrusion ( Eingriff ) of the other in her self-consciousness takes with her the form of a consciousness of being other than the others” ( Kimura 1992a: 124). Kimura expands on the notion of otherness: One could draw the conclusion that the specific trouble-point in schizophrenic re Election resides precisely in the fact that it is not “the other” ( der Andre ), but rather alterity or otherness ( das Andre ), that appears as another self in self-con sciousness of the patient. Consequently, the essential change in the schizophrenic himself is found in the constant questioning that defines him, of which one of the moments, alterity or otherness, is not integrated into the identity of the self, but remains as such naked.

(Kimura 1992a: 127)

Kimura suggests that this sense of otherness may go beyond a personalized other and be experienced as an otherness at the core of the schizophrenic self—what he terms “a ran scendent otherness... transcendental other... the absolute non-I, the absolutely oth er... the principle of absolute extraneousness at the core of the self” ( Kimura 1992b: 138).

Entangled in this confusion over who she is, the person with schizophrenia is unable to experience real spontaneity in her actions. Rather than just act, she halts with questions such as “who is acting?” and “who am I?” And with a sense of otherness at the center of herself, it is not hard to imagine her developing delusions of influence, that someone or something else inside or outside her mind is causing her activity.

Interpersonal Perspective For Kimura problems in interpersonal relations do not simply follow from the self-disturb Dance described above. Rather, he places self-disturbance and disturbed interpersonal re Cations together in the foundation of schizophrenia. He begins his discussion of the inter personal with the Japanese concept aïda. This concept, related to the con Dept of openness described above, expresses a primary bond between self and world, as well as a primary bond between oneself and others, and also the relation between dime ions of oneself. In the Japanese sensibility we do not start as Gonads but rather as mem Hers of a community of others. One develops oneself as an individual self out of an initial state of unity with others.

Kimura Bin (p. 153) In a normal relationship that flows out of a fundamental bond of aïda, each Hindi visual must experience herself as the complex of the subjective and objective, the un mediated and mediated described above; and each must experience the other as the same complex inferiority, one subjectivity meeting another. According to Kimura, this does not happen in schizophrenia. The altered state of the patient’s aïda does’t allow it. For Kim ra “... it is the intersubjective constitution of the world itself that is disturbed in the foundation of schizophrenia” ( Kimura 1992a: 125).

In schizophrenia the interpersonal world ( aïda ) and the intrasubjective world collapse to ether. We have already seen how the intrasubjective world breaks down in schizophre nia. Unable to manage the balance between the spontaneous, immediate I and the object tivized, mediated self, the person with schizophrenia experiences the otherness of the me dated self as an other, an other that attacks her from outside, as in paranoia, or an other that dwells within her mind as a foreign source or agent. From the interpersonal perspex Dive, the patient is unable to participate in aïda.

The interior process of finding one’s bond with others—subject to subject—is called jikaku. In the encounter with a schizophrenic patient the psychiatrist experiences the strangeness in the patient that prevents the usual flow of interpersonal aïda, as well as a disruption in one’s own jikaku. “As Japanese we try to overcome individuality in flowing from our personal self to find the common aïda. It’s in that manner that I encounter schizo ophrenics in my jikaku ” (Pélicier 1992: 188). In describing further this experience of the patient’s schizophrenia, Kimura writes: I search for the key to schizophrenia in my own inferiority where the schizo phrenic provokes an abnormal Poetic atmosphere that comes from his effort to avoid contact with others at a Poetic level. The alteration which the schizophrenic encounter provokes in aïda blocks one’s usual consciousness of oneself. This diff cult particular to schizophrenia corresponds to a deficiency in the Poetic level of individualization that makes impossible development at the noematic level.

(Pélicier 1992: 188)

Temporal Perspective In a paper entitled “Temporality in Schizophrenia: Contrast between Schizophrenia Tem orality and the Temporality of Non-schizophrenic Delusional Psychoses”, Kimura proposes to erect a psychopathology based on temporality, on the idea that tem orality is experienced differently in the various psychoses. He invokes Heidegger’s three “ecstasies” of past, present, and future to lead his discussion and, in contrast to elan holy that is rooted in guilt over the past, he considers schizophrenia as a psychopatholo gy of the future. Quoting Heidegger, he points out that the self ( Casein ) is always ahead of itself (site vorweg) and always coming to itself ( auf-site-selbst zukommen ) (Kimura 1992c: 141). In the balance between the Poetic I and the noematic self, the self is not a Kimura Bin fixed, developed entity. It is a self always in formation throughout one’s life. In the Hei deggerian terminology just cited, the self is always ahead of itself and always coming back to itself. And as we saw above, the subjective, Poetic I acts only in relation to the ob jective, noematic self. If the latter is not developing properly, the operative I will not fun son correctly, and the core schizophrenic disturbance will persist through the passage of time.

(p. 154) Conclusion: Between Onozukara and # Mizukara It is fitting to conclude this chapter with a discussion of “Between Onozukara and Mizukara: Pathology of the Ego from a Traditional Japanese Perspective”, in which Kimura reflects on his understanding of schizophrenia in the context of trad tonal Japanese concepts. The first is aïda, which we have seen above, and which repre Bents the bond or “between” that unites just about anything—for example, the aïda between Sunday and Monday—but more importantly includes the “between” in interper Tonal relations, and even the “between” in dimensions of the self. Moreover, the unity of aïda is so basic that it precedes individuation—individuation in the interpersonal sphere and individuation in the intrapersonal sphere. The latter implies that “everyone of us has to constitute himself as a self on the basis of this ‘interior’ aïda ” (Kimura 1992d: 37).

How this is accomplished requires an excursus into ancient Japanese etymology. In trad tonal Japanese the word mizukara meant oneself or myself. With the introduction of Chi nose characters or ideograms the Chinese character ji was introduced to translate mizukara (Cara = “my own body,” and mi = “my own flesh”). The problem was the same character was used to translate another Japanese word onozukara (“in itself” in an imper Tonal sense). “Japanese thus used these two words to differentiate these two notions: ji-ko or ji-bun for ‘myself’ ( mizukara ) and ji-nen for ‘in itself’ (onozukara )” (Kimura 1992d: 38). Over time ji-nen (“in itself” or onozukara ) came to mean nature.

Kimura explains the seemingly confusing fact that mizukara and onozukara are represent ed by the same Chinese character in the following manner. The ji in both concepts means to arise spontaneously out of an origin. “ Ji-ko, ji-nen/shi-zen, mizukara onozukara are in other words different modes of the auto-articulation or auto-manifestation of the sponta nous, universal movement out of an originary point” ( Kimura 1992d: 39). Consequently, in Japanese thought the concept of “self” covers both nature and the individual self. In this sense an authentic self implies participation in the universal process of nature. “The ‘self’ is, one might say, ‘interiorized nature’, and nature is in some manner ‘exteriorized self’ ” (Kimura 1992d: 39). Thus self and nature, mizukara and onozukara, have the same origin.

We can now say that there is an interpersonal aïda (oneself and others) and an intraper Tonal aïda (mizukara and onozukara within the self). The latter implies that an authentic Kimura Bin self includes a transcendent principle of nature ( onozukara ) within the self. Kimura refers to this intrapersonal aïda as the arch-aïda.

Relating these concepts to what we have covered earlier in the chapter, we can say that these Japanese concepts of intrasubjective aïda, mizukara, and onozukara represent Kimura’s deepened, Japanese understanding of what he has described in Western Fermi nology. M izukara and onozukara are loosely the equivalents of the Poetic, unmediated I and the mediated, noematic self. In more familiar language, the mediated, noematic, onozukara dimension of the self implies a principle of otherness at the center of the self.

(p. 155) Continuing his analysis of intrasubjective aïda, Kimura turns finally to schizophre nia, stating that “the fundamental problematic of schizophrenic disturbances, as a failure of interpersonal relations, can now be understood entirely in terms of pathologic changes in the constitution of the arch-aïda ” (Kimura 1992d: 41). To the question, is the schizo phrenic disturbance a self-disturbance or an interpersonal disturbance, the answer is that there is no difference. As I wrote on another occasion: “Following Kimura’s analysis, the self is constituted in a double relation, a relation to itself and a relation to the other. And the two relations are themselves related” ( Phillips 2001: 344). There is an “interpersonal” split at the center of the intrapersonal self. Kimura reminds us that ordinary intercourse with others, interpersonal aïda, involves the meeting of two subjective selves—two infra subjective aïdas —each with a principle of otherness at the center of itself. “Encountering another subject means relating one’s interior self to a completely other interior self, that is to say, to the absolutely unknown interior aïda of another, who himself also relates him self to himself in a radically strange interior world that remains inaccessible to any magi nary projection of the first subject” ( Kimura 1992d: 43). If the schizophrenic, or pre-schizo ophrenic, individual has not developed her own subjective self, with its basis in interior otherness, the interpersonal relation will collapse into a confusion of what is self and what is non-self. Unable to recognize her own interior otherness as herself, the schizo phrenic confuses it with the otherness of the other and concludes that her mind has been taken over by an alien source.

Kimura concludes this text, and I will conclude the chapter, with his recommendations for treatment of schizophrenic individuals. Aside from what can be accomplished with antipsychotic medications, he says that the only way the psychotherapist can help the patient develop a full self is through presenting himself or herself as a real person with an ade quately developed sense of self, trying to reach the patient as subject to subject. “[T]he therapist becomes, above all, that authentic ‘other’ whom we have described as an inter nal contradiction between a finite individuality and a transcendental infinite, or again, as an internal difference between mizukara and onozukara ” (Kimura 1992d: 45). PAGE_BREAK This chapter discusses the achievements of Wolfgang Blankenburg in phenomenological psychopathology and his theory of psychiatry and psychotherapy in general. Coming from the so-called “Anthropologische Psychiatric,” Blankenburg, his early years, focused on de eloping a comprehensive understanding of schizophrenic psychoses as a different form of existing in the world rather than as dysfunctional behavior. Later Blankenburg’s psy chopathological oeuvre extended to a wide range of clinical conditions, yet always con corned with seeing the positives of living with symptoms rather than their deficits. He transferred psychopathological insights into therapeutic approaches—from psychothera peutical to body-centered methods. Blankenburg found stimulating ideas in a broad range of humanities, including anthropology, sociology, and ethnology. His own way of thinking became “dialectical,” defined by his own words as the openness to different concepts of cultural and historical self-understanding of man. In his later years his rather philosophy cal reflections centered on the fields of temporality and creativity of human beings.

Keywords: psychopathology, anthropological psychiatry, forms of existence, dialectics, temporality, embodiment, creativity # Biographical Sketch WOLFGANG Blankenburg (b.1928, Bremen, Germany, d. 2002, Marburg, Germany) stud ied philosophy and psychology from 1947 and, from 1950, also medicine at the University of Freiburg, Germany. In 1956 he received his doctorate. The topic of his dissertation was the study of a patient with paranoid schizophrenia, using a Casein-analytical approach that took its lead from psychoanalysis as well as from Heidegger’s account of Casein, or human existence. The schizophrenic condition remained a major focus of his future re search. In 1957 he began internal medicine and psychosomatic training at Heidelberg University Hospital. Two years later, he became an assistant researcher, and in 1963 se Dior physician at the Psychiatric University Clinic in Freiburg. There he completed his ha bilitation thesis in 1967. In 1969 Blankenburg went back to the Psychiatric University Wolfgang Blankenburg Hospital in Heidelberg. After Walter von Beyer’s retirement, he took over the position of acting director of the clinic. From 1975 he was director of the Psychiatric Clinic I at the hospital Bremen-Ost. In 1979 he was appointed to the chair of psychiatry at the University of Marburg, a position he kept until his retirement in 1993. Blankenburg was a member of many national and international psychiatric and research societies and was invited to lec Cure around the world, having strong connections to Japan, Italy, France, and South America. He was appointed honorary member of the Berlin-based “Gesellschaft für Philosophic und Wissenschaften der Psyche” whose foundation and structure he helped to shape. He strongly supported this society’s approach to understanding psychic phenom na out of the heterodisciplinarity of all scientific disciplines dealing with them, and to ar Cuing that one’s approach to such phenomena should be open-minded and never seen as completed. With his vast experience he became a spiritual rector for younger colleagues and an indispensable interlocutor. He was married to Ute Blankenburg, née HäPele, and had three children.

Blankenburg only published one monograph. He wrote more than 170 essays which are spread through anthologies, psychiatric journals, as well as sometimes remote journals in other fields. Thus the oeuvre is not easy to access. The publication of his most important essays in the edition by Martin Heine is helpful and includes a bibliography of all his writings. His monograph was translated into nearly all major lan gauges, (p. 158) including Japanese and recently Chinese. Unfortunately this book was never translated into English, and neither were his essays. This task is still to be under taken.

Contributions to Psychopathology Blankenburg made an indispensable contribution to the advancement of not only phenom ecological psychopathology, but also psychopathology in general. The period of his writ ing was shaped by the still existing vitality of the tradition of anthropological psychiatry on the one hand, and by the already incipient reform psychiatry and the second biological psychiatry on the other. In these conflicting fields he formed a psychiatric thought which includes a variety of medications between the poles of empiricism and theory, clinical and social psychiatry, and philosophy and psychotherapeutic practice.

Blankenburg writes in the tradition of those psychiatrists for whom phenomenology con stituted an essential basic science for psychopathology. In his earlier works he made use of phenomenology in order to create an understanding of schizophrenia not only as a dys functional set of symptoms but as a different way of personal existence. The attitude toward valuing psychiatric conditions not only as negative constraints on a person’s way of living but positively as belonging to the set of human possibilities still holds today and is reflected in contempt Cary discussions about empowerment and resilience.

Wolfgang Blankenburg In his later works he remained open to the methodological alternatives that could be pro Aided by different schools of philosophy and expanded the philosophical, and later socio logical, foundation for his own work. Unlike many other authors of anthropological psy chiatry, he adopted not only theories of phenomenological provenance, but also critical theory and structuralism, giving the social reality of human beings its proper place. He al so granted empiricism, in particular the specific patient-related practice, a larger space and used it as a critical corrective to older theoretical work that was more centered on the individual rather than on his or her relationships. Nevertheless, Blankenburg dissociative identity disorder re main a phenomenologist in his own sense: to regard all human experiences and actions as important and analyzing them in detail without being restrained by an overly narrow no son of phenomenology in a Heideggerian or even Husserlian sense.

Being devoted to openness meant that Blankenburg was repeatedly correcting his own concepts through the reception of empirical research and new conceptual ideas. This re salted in the wide range of topics that characterize his work. There are contributions to the relationship between philosophy and psychiatry, to the mind–body problem, to a cri Pique of Daseinsanalysis, and not least to a dialectical approach fostering the idea of a psychopathology of freedom. The clinical essays deal with themes such as illusion, com mon sense, suffering, and the facilitation of therapy through taking over a future-second-per spective, that is, allowing a patient to view his life as it could be seen from his position in the future and thus opening a realm for change and activities.

Altogether, Blankenburg created a philosophically informed link between clinical psychic try, anthropology, and sociology, which makes his texts of continuing interest to psychic Wrists and philosophers alike. With his writings, Blankenburg proves himself to be a sus trainable thinker, and a “quiet” one in the sense that he dissociative identity disorder not foster a general theory of (p. 159) psychopathology but remained open to diverse phenomena in all their details. He unfolds no dramatic thesis, but critically appropriates the best of the tradition and pur sues the concrete and precise tasks of mediating theoretical knowledge and the practice of psychiatry and psychotherapy.

Psychiatric Anthropology In his earliest writings, Blankenburg follows an approach adopted from previous authors of phenomenological psychiatry, especially Binswanger, Tellenbach, Boss, and Butt: the deduction of general aspects of human existence or fundamental anthropological situ sons out of the analysis of individual cases. In particular, the phenomenon of delusion is a priority for him. One example of this is an essay on becoming independent of the content of a delusion, published in 1965. In this essay, Blankenburg summarizes delusion as “a 1 possibility of a processual modification of the world-self-relation” (1965a: 139). The sub Sect of delusion, “chosen” by the patient, will be understandable from the analysis of his biography and life situation, but above all from the constitution of meaning which emerged for the individual patient within his biographical development and was convert ed through the disease process.

Wolfgang Blankenburg From the investigation of Daseinsanalysis in his dissertation grows a body of work, in which characteristic features of psychiatric disorders are developed out of individual case studies. Another text of the same year about the differential phenomenology of delusional perception is of significance, since contents of the special meaning of the abnormal deli signal experience for the individual can be made concretely intelligible from the subject’s biographical background. Thus, starting from the phenomena, interpretation succeeds. Here, phenomenology and hermeneutics are the tools for the psychopathologists (1965b). In another essay Blankenburg then defines what “anthropological” means in psychiatric science: The “anthropological” refers to both a human being as a research subject and at the same time to a method appropriate to study this subject. Pathological deviations should be understood in general not only along the line of “healing” and “wholeness” of the human condition, but positively out of the nature of the human being. Important here is the adjective “positive.” Psychopathology would be understood in a much more superfi Dial way if malfunction were only to be regarded negatively.

For his own idea of psychopathology, Blankenburg uses the keyword “dialectical.” In an essay from 1981 on the reach of the dialectical approach in psychiatry, he determines di alectic as dealing with the negative per se. At the same time, he also points out that there is something “ambivalent” in the basic constitution of human beings which can be grasped only with such large oppositions as body and soul or growth and decay. Thus, di alectical thinking is a method adequate for understanding a human being as subject. More than that, the methodological approach of dialectics also has practical meaning be cause in the broadest sense Blankenburg wants “every regular change of standpoint” to be understood out of a dialectical attitude “that allows us to systematically set aside limit ed horizons” (1981: 47).

For his own idea of psychopathology, Blankenburg uses the keyword “dialectical.” In an essay from 1981 on the reach of the dialectical approach in psychiatry, he determines di alectic as dealing with the negative per se. At the same time, he also points out that there is something “ambivalent” in the basic constitution of human beings which can be grasped only with such large oppositions as body and soul or growth and decay. Thus, di alectical thinking is a method adequate for understanding a human being as subject. More than that, the methodological approach of dialectics also has practical meaning be cause in the broadest sense Blankenburg wants “every regular change of standpoint” to be understood out of a dialectical attitude “that allows us to systematically set aside limit ed horizons” (1981: 47).

(p. 160) The symptoms expressed in psychopathology become apparent only after being seen as possibilities of human existence. The point is to understand the reality of each in dividual disturbance, its history, and its developmental opportunities comprehensively. The methodology of individual case analysis as a basis for general understanding culmi antes in Blankenburg’s habilitation thesis on schizophrenia simplex, his renowned book Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit (The Loss of Natural Self-understand ability), published in 1971. That text presents a theory of schizophrenia that works out the positive character of each individual’s worldand self-constitution which, for us, be ing mentally well, is self-evident but nonetheless means an active achievement, and thus can be lost. Studying psychosis teaches us to look behind such self-evident truths. Closely related to this book are Blankenburg’s analysis of “common sense”. The phenomenon of so-called common sense is in no way naturally given. We need to study its deficits and loss in order to reach its nature, significance, and importance. These studies, inspired by individual clinical cases, are followed by essays that take a more ac curate and defined view on psychiatric anthropology. When talking of the essential deter minations of existence, it is important for the psychopathologist to find a measurement. Anthropology requires measurements, thought as proportions, and for this purpose ini sally uses spatial metaphors. Thus one can speak of the height and width of existence, as Binswanger does. But Blankenburg stresses, leaving Binswanger be Wolfgang Blankenburg hind, that phenomenological anthropology must go beyond the narrow focus on spatiality alone, reaching emotionality and temporality.

In close connection with these considerations is the theme of corporeality. An exemplary text on the role of the body in psychiatry demonstrates the bodily dimension of human existence as being fundamental and inescapable. In addition to the physical presence given in the term body ( Köper ), the bodily or corporal dimension (Lab ) contains the personal experience of a human being in terms of his existence, the way he feels and experiences, but also how he realizes his subjectivity in his lived world. Blankenburg lines up closely with phenomenological philosophy, and especially takes Husserl as a starting point of his considerations. As a result, for a variety of psychopath logical symptoms, he discusses the proper bodily structure in which they are realized, and argues that without an analysis of these structures, references to symptoms remain abstract. In other texts, Blankenburg takes corporeality or embodiment as the starting point for discussing the mind–body problem in general as it arises in psychiatry. For psychiatric theory this remains a necessary layer. Thinking corporeality, in formed, for example, by Merleau-Monty, is part of the basic science of psychiatry, as much as referring to the spiritual aspects of existence. Both poles are mutually inseparable and dialectically mediated.

Psychiatric Practice and Psychotherapy Blankenburg stands between anthropological and Daseinsanalytical psychopathology on the one side, and dialectical philosophy on the other, the latter forming the basis of social psychiatric reforms in the 1970s. With this opening of the theoretical framework, he gave psychiatric anthropology a new opportunity at a time when it was neither fashionable nor regarded as scientifically important.

(p. 161) The practical orientation leads to a modified concept of psychopathology. In his text on basic problems of psychopathology, he explicates a modified object of psychopathology. First, he notes that psychopathology was caught in a fund mental crisis after the historical developments of both anthropological and social psychic try. Blankenburg considers it necessary to redefine the object of psychopathology. In con toast to the traditional medical model of disease, which understands symptoms as evi Fence of objective disease processes and independent of human daily life and habits, a new psychopathology is formed by developing in terms of functioning and behavior. But this new approach is as reductive as objectivist medicine. Against this reference to behave ior only, Blankenburg formulates a counter-thesis: The subject of psychopathology should not be deviant behavior but a variety of impairments of abilities to behave or of conduct. This, he claims, is something quite different. Abilities of conduct cannot altogether be subsumed under behavior. It is not about whether someone behaves one way or another, or about behavior as a finished product, but about degrees of freedom to produce whatev er behavior. The psychopathological problem is not whether a person behaves in a defog Dative or unjustified manner, but whether he is able to behave in conformity to norms. The Wolfgang Blankenburg question is if there are abilities or not: “The psychopathologist must look behind the be Savior itself to the underlying abilities of conduct and their limitations” (1978: 142). But even the reference to the abilities of conduct is not sufficient. It must be supplemented by the dimension of abilities to experience. Indeed, all experience will be mediated through behavior. Nevertheless, this does not deprive it of its independence. A general subsume son of experience cannot be justified and would lead to a considerable lessening of psy chopathological knowledge. Taken together, the disturbances of the abilities to expert Once and to behave therefore constitute psychopathological findings.

Decisive for the psychopathologists are ultimately impairments of degrees of freedom which by no means must always adequately be reflected in a subject’s feeling. These im pairments could be understood methodologically most likely in the realm of a psy chopathology of freedom, as has already been suggested by the French psychiatrist Ey who defined psychiatry as “la pathologie du suet et de sa liberté [the pathology of the subject and of its freedom]” ( Ey 1973: 1437). Freedom, for psychopathology, serves as an indispensable reference point. Should psychopathology give up this reference point it risks abandoning itself. The phenomenal range of degrees of freedom is nothing abstract, but corresponds to the everyday experience of psychiatrists: “What for theoretical rea Boning is accessible at the best through speculation, for practical reasoning—which gains its right from everyday contact to patients—it is a quite differentiable fact modifying the contact itself” (1982b: 37).

Psychopathology is a science that describes limitations of abilities of patients in their con Crete biographical situations. It plays out in the tension between autonomy and heterono my. The restrictions of patients’ freedom will be experienced as suffering. This suffering, in the first place, entitles psychotherapists to execute therapy in order to achieve modify cations. Thus, the ethics of psychiatry and psychotherapy presupposes some idea of hu man freedom that is damaged in some particular case and then requires treatment. The notion of suffering with its practical relevance opens up psychiatric theory for sociology and social pathology. Blankenburg distinguishes primary and secondary psychological strain, in analogy to primary and secondary morbid gain (the latter arises only from the effects of a disorder and not by the disorder itself) and presents their appearances in the various psychiatric syndromes. The suffering of a patient must also be understood psi Lively in terms of a call for modification. In psychotherapy, new options of existence have to be found in the face of suffering. (p. 162) Techniques may be found, for example, from a compound of psychodynamic and existential perspectives, as Benedetti illustrated for the psychotherapy of schizophrenic patients.

The Temporality and Creativity of Human Be # Dings A third basic idea is specific to Blankenburg’s view on psychopathology: psychopathology is not fixed, it is always developing. The interest of psychotherapists should not be ex hasted only in reconstructing the genesis of a symptom. Rather, it is aimed at influence Wolfgang Blankenburg ing the current living situation of the patient and his possibilities in the future. Blacken burg discusses temporality as being constitutive for therapy in his late text on the future- second-perspective in its importance for the development of the life-history of the patient (1989b). The grammatical form of future-second leads to a jump forward in which we perceive the open opportunities in the current situation. “Rather, we have to find a way from the imagined future back to the present and into the past” (1989b: 76). The genesis of the self from the future is at least equivalent to one from the past. This demands a change of theoretical perspective (against, e.g. psychoanalysis): “The human ego unfolds no less from the future” (1989b: 79). With such openness for future development, confidence is given back to the patient, which had been shaken by the psychopathological symptoms, and can be regained only in the perspectives of future possibilities.

The therapeutic work between patient and therapist is about enhancing degrees of free dom in the pursuit of life of the patient: “A main desideratum of current psychotherapy is —complementary to the analytical examination of the past—to develop therapies that in crease not only ‘freedom of’ but ‘freedom for’. An opening for the future as well as the is sue of the maturation of existence [ Zeitigung des Daseins ] in different life situations is among the indispensable tasks of an anthropologically oriented psychotherapy” (1989b: 82). Human beings are characterized by that fact that they are developing from what will come to them in the future, whereas other natural processes can be attributed to what was previous. On a practical level, this results in an altered relationship between patient and therapist. A new layout of the world of the patient who was disturbed in his natural outlining of the world will be recognized as a positive achievement from which something new can develop. Psychotherapy takes the character of a permanent communicative con tact and interaction; it is at the same time repetition and creating something new. The therapist is ready for constant interaction because he respects the particular existence of the patient as an opening up of something new, something to be created jointly.

The therapeutic action is understandable only if human existence is looked at from its temporality. A philosophical anthropology as the basic science for psychotherapy, and not only for psychopathology, has to be aware of temporality as an essential category. Blankenburg found this in philosophy, especially in the writings of Husserl and Bergson. With these, and later with Heidegger, temporality is not only one but the essential feature of human existence. This thinking was received from classical writings, especially those of Binswanger and Minkowski. The alterations of time-experience are discussed as the most (p. 163) significant psychopathological phenomena of endogenous depression and schizophrenic psychosis, and from there the general temporality of human existence is deduced.

For Blankenburg, in his later scientific oeuvre, the maturation of existence from a psych attic point of view is the central theme. The difference between an objective, measurable time and the subjective quality of the maturation of existence is fundamental for the way a human being lives time. This way is often distorted in mental illness and is painfully perceived when the future is closed up or appears as a frozen eternity, lacking everything lively, as in depression; or, when time loses the character of opening up the realm of Wolfgang Blankenburg growing, as in schizophrenic psychosis. Suffering from a mental illness as such has an ex istential dimension that distinguishes it from suffering from physical illnesses. Psy chotherapy has to relate to this fact and becomes the “recovery of the historicity of one’s own life story” (1992: 144). Blankenburg always assigns concrete psychotherapeutic tech Piques to the often abstract appearance of psychopathological constructs with the aim that a patient may be free in terms of his future development and may regain authorship of his life’s story.

With this demand concerning the therapeutic attitude Blankenburg completes his en hancements of psychiatric anthropology. Using phenomenology as his main starting point and lasting ideal, he gave phenomenological psychopathology a broader base, even erg ing in thoughts from competing schools of philosophy as, for example, dialectical philoso phy. Thus he contributes to phenomenological psychopathology both as a protagonist and as a critic. PAGE_BREAK THE psychiatrist Franco Basaglia’s theoretical ideas have been studied in some depth, 1 while his work inside psychiatric hospitals has also attracted attention. His ideas were derived from a series of phenomenological writers—Sartre, Husserl, Binswanger, Minkowski—and sociologists working on asylums and their history—in particular Irving Hoffman. He read Foucault but was more interested in his historical analysis than his theoretical approach. It was also clear that Basaglia was deeply affected in both his practice and theory by the work of Promo Levi on the concentration camp system. Basaglia traveled widely and studied psychiatric practice inside many asy looms in France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and elsewhere. He also adapted his ideas and practice to the situations he found himself in after entering the asylum system in the early 1960s. In this chapter I will argue that it is Basaglia’s practice (and its legacy) rather than his theory (although the two often worked together) that marks him out in terms of psychiatric history. In order to do this, I will first refer to Basaglia’s life-story, be Franco Basaglia fore looking at his theoretical approach to psychiatry. I will then underline how these ideas were put into practice in the period between 1961 and Basaglia’s death in 1980.

Biography Franco Basaglia was born in 1924 in Venice. He opposed the ideas and policies of the fas Dist regime and as a teenager took part in anti-fascist activities. In November 1944, he was arrested and sent to Venice’s prison with no sentence. The prison was a forbidding place, (p. 166) with daily deportations and an area reserved for Jewish prisoners. It was run by the Nazis and Italian fascists.

Venice was liberated from fascism in April 1945. But Basaglia dissociative identity disorder not take up a career in politics after the war. He wanted to be an academic and saw himself as an intellectual. For eighteen years he studied medicine and psychiatry in Padua. He was, by all accounts, a brilliant student. He was also unorthodox, becoming interested in new forms of filo sophical thought. It was at university and also through a seminar group organized by Pier Francisco Gall in Milan that Basaglia first came into contact with phenomenology—he read Sartre, Binswanger, Husserl, and Minkowski in this period and published academic papers. He also met like-minded younger psychiatrists in Milan and Venice.

Disenchanted with the career prospects offered by the university system, Basaglia be came Director of the Psychiatric Hospital in a city called Gorizia in 1961. Gorizia was a Cold War town of just 40,000 people and with numerous soldiers, barracks, and check points. The iron curtain was just yards away. It was also right-wing, with a powerful Christian Democratic Party, a strong neo-fascist presence and a tiny left. Not, perhaps, the obvious place to start a revolution. In November 1961 Basaglia took charge of the asylum, with its 500 patients.

Gorizia’s asylum was like many others in Italy—and in the world—at that time. It had the architecture and paraphernalia of containment that had been built up over years—cages for unruly patients, straitjackets, portable elector-shock machines, storerooms for person al belongings which were destined, in many cases, never to be collected. Like many asy looms, the buildings were right on the edge of town.

Italy’s asylums were regulated by two pre-fascist laws—from 1904 and 1908—which used the phrase “a danger to themselves and to others, or a public scandal” and the fascist criminal code of 1930, which gave patients a criminal record, despite the fact that they had committed no crime and been subject to no trial. There were treatments carried out inside Gorizia’s asylum, but it would be difficult to describe them as therapeutic. Inmates were subject (without any choice) to elector-shock and insulin therapy, lobotomies as well as straightforward forms of torture.

Many settled down after a time into what Hoffman called in 1961 the “career” of the “per Sect patient”—passive, bowed down, accepting of the system, no longer in control of their bodily functions. Their days went by without any real sign of change. Time went on, but Franco Basaglia they had no sentence to serve. Forms of what would later be called institutionalization could be seen everywhere, amongst patients and nurses. Doctors came and went as they pleased, carrying out what R. D. Ling would call the “ceremonial of control” of the ward 2 round before dedicating themselves to their private practices.

Basaglia’s first reaction to this place was one of disgust. It also reminded him of his own past and his time in prison (Foot 2015a: 5). Basaglia’s mind was made up from the start. He would not accept the way this institution worked. It disgusted him. From the very be ginning (p. 167) he believed that the institution was similar to a concentration camp. He saw it as a place of death, and later defined it as a dumping ground for the poor and the 3 “deviant.”

But how could such a place be changed? There was no clear plan at the beginning, apart from a desire to change things. Basaglia’s first act as Director was one of resistance. Ac cording to a colleague, “On his first day as director in Gorizia, when the head nurse passed him the list of people who had been tied up that night, he said, ‘I’m not sign ing.’ ” (Foot 2015a: 18).

Basaglia’s wide reading of phenomenological texts before arriving in the asylum provided him with a set of ideas and approaches which he then put into practice as Director of an institution. Other texts and experiences were added to the Basaglian “canon” during the 1960s and 1970s. I will now look at this theoretical and philosophical approach in more detail.

Basaglia’s Theoretical Approach As a student and researcher in the 1950s, Basaglia had become interested in the way that Ludwig Binswanger applied phenomenological ideas to psychiatry. Like Binswanger (and later Ling) Basaglia argued that mental illness could be understood. “The condition of the schizophrenic,” as Colucci and Di Vittorio put it, “as with that of a sane person, is a way of being in the world. It cannot be excluded from the world of reason as something that is incomprehensible. What is needed is an understanding of its reasons and a search for the keys to that understanding” ( Colucci and Di Vittorio 2001: 30).

In his day-to-day dealings with patients Basaglia argued that all medical diagnosis should be “placed in brackets” (borrowing from his reading of Husserl) ( Colucci and Di Vittorio 2001: 27–29; Sforza Tarabochia 2013: 106–111). This allowed Basaglia and his colleagues to free themselves of preconceived (medical and specialized) ideas and stereotypes about the people they were supposedly “treating.” The doctor was no longer a doctor, and the patient was no longer a patient. A series of factors thus came into play beyond a fixed di agnosis—society, the institution itself, as well as personal histories.

Thus, following Husserl, for Basaglia it was important to build up a relationship with the people inside the asylum, to listen to their stories. Once again, this was not just a set of ideas—but very much part of daily practice in the Basaglian hospital. For this reason, as Franco Basaglia well, Basaglia demanded that his équipe were constantly present in the hospital, some times for days on end. The Basaglian revolution was about listening, talking, debating, and understanding. In doing so, the barriers created by technical education, white coats, and hierarchies were discarded or broken down. Intersubjective relationships were Great ed (or attempted).

In one case, Basaglia and his first collaborator inside Gorizia, Antonio Slavish, spent four days and nights listening to the traumatic life-story of a patient called Mario Furman, who had tried to commit suicide on various occasions. Furman would go on to become one of the patient leaders of the movement inside the hospital. Basaglia dissociative identity disorder not just removes fences, gates, and barriers—as well as locks on doors—he encouraged the patients to take power. (p. 168) Fences were pulled down by the patients themselves. “We put the key in the door,” Basaglia later said, “but they (the patients) needed to turn it” ( Foot 2015a: 156). In 1965, hospital-wide patient meetings were introduced. Votes were taken and dis cessions ranged around a variety of issues, from the mundane to the profound.

Basaglia’s Approach in Practice In the hospital itself, fighting against the logic of the institution, Basaglia needed allies. The vast majority of the nursing staff was against change, and the other medics were largely (and often violently) conservative. He decided to recruit like-minded friends and colleagues to create a group—or an “équipe” as it became known. Bit by bit, the balance of power in the hospital began to change. Soon, walls were knocked down and fences re moved, the tying up of patients was discouraged and then phased out altogether, and some were even discharged as far as was possible under the 1904 legislation. Electroshock therapy was reduced (although not phased out entirely). A patient newspaper was set up. A bar was opened in the grounds, as was a hairdresser. Patients got back their clothes, and their dignity. Men and women were allowed to mix together. Many were en courage to find work, for which they were paid.

These assemble would become the precursors of 1968. Hyper-democracy had been intro Educed in the heart of one of the most anti-democratic institutions imaginable. This was the overturning, the negation, the cultural revolution that Basaglia desired. By this time, he was also influenced by Maoist thought—and his reading of the cultural revolution in China. His aim was to destroy, as he wrote in 1964, the whole psychiatric hospital system.

4 Such a radical change was, he argued, necessary and obvious.

Basaglia’s initial approach based on his readings of Binswanger and Husserl, amongst others, was continually modified and adapted to cope with the reality of the “total institu son.” Moreover, other radical texts began to circulate in Italy—and these were read by psychiatrists close to Basaglia. Michel Foucault’s History of Madness provided, for Basaglia, a critique of reformist approaches to madness and historical context. R. D. Ling’s The Divided Self (which saw what was called schizophrenia as understand able and even a rational reaction to the pressures of modernity) was a central text for Franco Basaglia Basaglia and his équipe (and the movement as a whole). It applied many of Basaglia’s own ideas to psychiatric practice and the understanding of mental illness.

But Basaglia was also greatly influenced by sociological texts, above all Irving Goffmans’s Asylums. Hoffman’s work—which was translated into Italian by Basaglia’s wife and political ally, Franc Ongaro, and recommended for publication by the Basaglias to the Einaudi publishing house in Turin, was central to the movement’s analysis of the asylum. Hoffman, a Canadian sociologist who had spent two years on the Shetland island of Inst in the 1950s, had immersed himself within the reality of a huge psychiatric hosp tal in Washington DC for more than a year. His analysis of the reality of the asylums was cold, detached, and devastating. Asylums were “total institutions,” which controlled every aspect of the lives of their (p. 169) inmates. The career of the asylum patient ended with 5 complete submission to the system.

Into this mix of texts and ideas should be added Promo Levi’s If this is a man. Basaglia had read this book as a young man and it had deeply influenced him. He saw the dehumanization described by Levi in Auschwitz as present in the asylum system, and he made constant comparisons between concentration camps and psychiatric hospitals. This was both an effective propaganda tool (the phrase Asylum = Concentration Camp was a powerful slogan during the 1960s and 1970s in Italy) and a reaction to the physical and moral state of many institutionalized patients within the asylum system. Levi provided Basaglia with a moral critique of the institution of which he was Director. His opposition to the asylum was never just technical, or philosophical—it was also moral and political.

Finally, Basaglia visited asylums that were undergoing change or had already introduced reforms, and applied some of these practices back in Italy. Sometimes, this was a simple matter of practice. But there were also theoretical refinements that Basaglia added to his canon of texts, quotations, and baggage of ideas and methods. For example, he was highly critical of some aspects of the Singleton hospital, arguing that there was a danger of creating a “nice” hospital—a reformist “golden cage”—which would be functional to the system’s survival. Basaglia, instead, wanted to destroy the entire system.

By 1968 Gorizia was beginning to have national impact. Gorizia fed into and fed off the movements that exploded across Italy and the world in that year. This transformed asy lum was a perfect fit for the ideas of that movement, especially in the early period of change. Italy’s institutions were in dire need of serious reform—schools, the army, the Church, prisons, the universities. Doctors, soldiers, prisoners, priests, lecturers, and stu dents all began to “overturn” their own institutions, and called for reform and real change. Gorizia represented the reality of somewhere that had already been transformed by a small, dedicated group of men and women. It became a model.

The Gorizian message reached the general public through the cultural industries. In March 1968, in another moment of perfect timing, a collective book was brought out by the prestigious Einaudi publishing house in Turin. The book was an account of what Basaglia called “the reality of an institution in transformation”—Gorizia. It contained the Franco Basaglia voices of patients as well as high theory and detailed accounts of debates. Its form, as well as its content, were deeply intertwined with 1968 and its aims.

The Negated Institution: Report from a Psychiatric Hospital was a publishing sensation. It flew off the shelves, and onto the shelves of every budding ’68er. It was translated into 6 French, German, Spanish, and Portuguese (but not into English). Students turned up to see Gorizia in droves—and were followed by journalists, photographers, and politicians. Italy’s health minister—the Socialist Luigi Mariotti—passed a reform in 1968 that soft need the repressive nature of the asylum system. He was scathing about the hospitals he had seen and compared them to “German concentration camps, Dantesque chambers of hell” (Foot 2015a: 75). By 1968 Gorizia was influencing national law and policy.

(p. 170) In 1972, the Gorizia revolution came to an abrupt end. The doctors resigned en maze, claiming at the same time that all but fifty-one of the patients in the hospital were “better.” They wrote an open letter, citing Franz Anon, to the Provincial Council. The psychiatrists claimed that: “Our presence in the psychiatric hospital, as well as being use less, is damaging for those patients... for whom we continue to represent, as psychic Wrists, the justification of their internment.” The radical doctors left, and normality re turned to Gorizia’s asylum. Basaglia’s revolution moved on.

From Gorizia, the “Basaglians” spread out across Italy—taking over hospitals and psych attic services in Arezzo, Venice, Ferrari, Pordenone, Dine, and elsewhere. Parallel move Bents were already in charge in places like Perugia and near Naples. In some places Basaglia was out-flanked on the left by Italian anti-psychiatrists who denied the very xis Fence of mental illness, but still found work high up in the world of psychiatric hospitals. Many asylums remained entirely unreformed.

In the early 1970s Basaglia moved to a bigger city and a larger asylum, in Trieste—close to Gorizia—another Cold War town. When he got there he found another almost un changed asylum—with familiar features such as cages, bars, and locked wards. Basaglia moved quickly, and he had, this time, full political support. Everything was easier now, and Trieste’s asylum opened up to the city, just as the city moved toward the asylum.

In the 1970s, the Trieste asylum would become a magnet for radical psychiatrists. It was in Trieste that new mental health services were first created, beyond the asylum. Basaglia’s liberation strategy was increasingly flamboyant. For example, on one occasion, patients were taken up in a chartered plane and flown over Venice—something that was denied to them by law.

The asylum in Trieste soon became a place of pilgrimage for psychiatrists and volunteers. In 1977 Basaglia held a press conference where he announced that the asylum in Trieste was, for all intents and purposes, no longer working as a psychiatric hospital. Across Italy, reformers and politicians began to push for change to the outdated laws governing mental health.

Franco Basaglia In 1978 the struggle that had started in Gorizia seventeen years earlier finally reached the parliamentary sphere—in Rome. A combination of circumstances had created a leg islative vacuum, and in twenty days (without even going to a parliamentary vote) the socalled Basaglia law was passed. It is also known—more correctly—as Law 180. Everyone was in favor—apart from the small neo-fascist party. The law called for the closure of all psychiatric hospitals. In addition, no new asylums could be built. The asylum system was over. Psychiatric patients were given back their human and civil rights (within limits). They were patients like the other patients with “normal” illnesses in general hospitals, not a special breed.

The law was a compromise—something of which Basaglia was well aware. It was a victor ry, but only a partial one. It was a beginning, not an end. The next twenty years would see alternative services created right across Italy—day care centers, emergency wards, halfway houses, cooperatives. The vast majority of those 100,000 patients re-entered nor mal life. Some, quite simply, could not exist outside the asylum. This group was given a technical name—they were called “residuals.” The strategy with regard to them was nev er explicitly spelled out but, in reality, the only thing to do was to wait for them to die.

This process of closure (and of opening up to society) was contradictory. There were sui ides and murders. Families often had to take up the slack after hospitals were closed.

(p. 171) Regional differences were huge and the funding and quality of new services var ied greatly across the country. Trieste, however, is still a model for psychiatric services post-asylum.

Franco Basaglia died in 1980, from a brain tumor. He was just fifty-six years old. He nev er had the chance to implement the law that took his name. Italy today has no asylums. It is no paradise, but that system is gone, and it was abolished not for reasons of cost, but for moral and political reasons. The “great internment” described by Foucault gave way, in the 1970s, to a “great liberation.” Society absorbed most of the 100,000 inmates who had been kept inside these places. This process was forced on the system from a move Bent that acted from inside the institutions themselves, in a way that was unique in the Western world. Italy’s asylums were closed down by the people who worked inside them. In doing so, these people abolished their own jobs. Today, Basaglia remains a household name in Italy (and not just there). He is still a hugely controversial figure who divides opinion. His legacy is also felt in many other countries, from the United Kingdom to Brazil to the Netherlands to Germany and his theory and practice are studied and discussed within many psychiatric contexts. There are ongoing debates about the effect of the re forms which took his name, and the history of the asylum system he helped to abolish. PAGE_BREAK 1 ( ) For Basaglia’s theory, see Colucci and Di Vittorio and Tarabochia. For his life and practical work, see Foot (2014a, 2014b, 2014c, 2015a, 2015b ). Basaglia’s writings (often written with his wife Franco Ongaro) were collected in two volumes after his death.

2 ( ) Basaglia also read Ling in the 1960s, and he was instrumental in the translation of Ling’s work into Italian, as he was with Hoffman. The Divided Self appeared as L’Io divisor in 1969 with Einaudi and a preface by Leticia Zomba who was part of the Gorizia équipe. Franco Ongaro translated Asylums, which also appeared with Einaudi, in 1969, with an introduction by Franco and Franc Basaglia.

3 ( ) See his accounts in Basaglia 1968, 2000, and Basaglia and Ongaro 1971. Very little of Basaglia’s work has been translated into English, although the best collection of his writ Dings is available in English.

4 ( ) For the idea of the “therapeutic community” and Basaglia’s critique of it see ( Foot 2015a: chapter 7).

5 ( ) A different version of this Foucault text was published in Italy in 1963.

6 ( ) For this book and its history, see Foot (2015a: chapters 11 and 12).

John Foot School of Modern Languages, University of Bristol Franz Anon # Franz Anon Lewis R. Gordon The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jan 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords “Franz Anon” offers a summary of the life of famed psychiatrist and philosopher Franz Anon followed by an outline of his critical thought on the problem of therapy and the construction of rigorous human science in an age marked by colonialism, racism, and oth er forms of dehumanization. Fallacious models of psychopathology and normality, premised on a problematic philosophical anthropology, are consequences the overcoming of which require decolonization of knowledge, the dialectics of double consciousness, and forms of radical critique of reason through which what could be called “Fanonian phe nomenology” comes to the fore.

Keywords: Franz Anon, decolonization, dehumanization, dialectics, double consciousness, phenomenology, psy chopathology, racism, reason # Introduction: Philosopher, Physician, and More FRANTZ Anon was a revolutionary philosopher, psychiatrist, playwright, po et, and essayist. This chapter will focus on two of these elements with the others borne in mind.

Although he was an extraordinary psychiatrist, today Anon is remembered primarily for his work as a philosopher. Physicians who are also remembered as philosophers are not unusual in the history of philosophy. Several noteworthy examples are Imhotep (c. 2667– 2600 BCE), Lady Presehet (c. 2500 BCE–?), Aristotle (384 BCE–322 BCE), Ge Hong (283– 343 or 363), Tao Hongjing, John Locke, Anton Wilhelm Africans Amo (c. 1703–c. 1759), Hang Xichun, William James, and Karl Jasper.

Born on the French Caribbean colony (now department) of Martinique, Anon was affect tionately called “Bergson” in his youth. Henri Bergson was the great philosopher and No bel Laureate who in his time stood for philosophy as Einstein dissociative identity disorder for physics. A deter mined humanist dedicated to fighting against degradation and injustice, Anon was a Franz Anon teenage volunteer in the French resistance against the Nazis in the Second World War and dissociative identity disorder the same throughout his thirties against the French in the Algerian War of Inge pendence. His training as a soldier, forensic and clinical psychiatrist, and as a philoso fer who studied at the University of Lyon with the great phenomenologist Maurice Mer lo-Monty made him a formidable freedom fighter and revolutionary thinker who in Aspired many fighting for liberation across the then Third World. He died on December 6, 1961 in Bethesda, Maryland, USA, while seeking treatment for leukemia.

Studies and use of Anon’s thought are plentiful across the humanities and social sci Fences, and, as Nigel Gibson and Roberto Beneduce’s Franz Anon, Psychiatry, and Poi tics attests, the life sciences. Addition ally, there is no short supply of biographies of this extraordinarily charismatic thinker.

Anon’s contributions to philosophy are many. He was a philosopher who transcended “disciplinary decadence,” where intellectuals attempt to reduce reality to their disciplines (p. 174) often through fetishizing their methods. Going beyond that requires a “teleology cal suspension of disciplinarity,” where one is willing to suspend one’s methods for the sake of developing a sober relationship with reality. Anon saw clearly the struggle of human beings to know and to understand, and he was sensitive to the dangers of forgetting the cultivation of human relationships in practices of social transformation and running institutions.

Theorizing Anti-Dehumanization Under Colo # Dial Conditions The pressing problem at hand, which for Anon was dehumanization, brought him in con versation with a variety of revolutionary humanist traditions. As he put it, colonialism and the Euromodern world committed a crime against humanity. He thus addressed in his writings, clinical practice, and political work, fundamentally, what it means to be hu man, challenges of dignity and freedom, and the critical problem of reason—the sine qua non of philosophy—being deployed in the interests of human degradation.

The first, germane to the phenomenological study of psychopathology, contributes to philosophical anthropology and the constellation of disciplines known as the human sci Fences. The second speaks to philosophy of liberation, revolutionary social change, and concerns of normative life. The third, however, brings Anon into debates in much of Eu romodern philosophy since the thought of the eighteenth-century German philosopher Im Manuel Kant and the forms of transcendental argumentation that flowed from his menu mental philosophical writings.

Transcendental idealism, which Kant also called critical philosophy in his Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, explores the conditions of possibility for any idea, any thought, by which reality could be made intelligible. Many proponents and critics of Kant Franz Anon are indebted to this turn. The former set attempts to expand what those conditions are. For instance, whole areas of philosophy have emerged from the idea that one cannot think, theorize, or philosophize outside of consciousness, language, systems of signs and symbols, or culture. Critics of this view often offer examples of moments of unthinkable breakdowns of the same set of conditions, and they often raise either existential examples of rejecting these or, more nihilistically, the futility of doing so under the weight of powerful, colonizing forces. Critics of the latter often insist that these forces are transcendental conditions for such breakdowns. The debates, in short, continue.

Anon, however, stood both in, and outside of, those conflicts. He brought to them a cen Aral question: What is the impact of colonialism and racism on the conditions of possibility celebrated or rejected on either side of these approaches?

The question was already there, in his heart, from his youth when he realized his relic Dance to separate people from their embodied existence. Even a cadaver, about which he wrote in Po Loire, masques blanks (Black Skin, White Masks ), was for him deserving of dignity and respect. His accepted doctoral thesis and (p. 175) several of his essays on psychiatric care are devoted to the importance of al ways addressing the Other, even when incapacitated by an illness such as Friedreich’s ataxia, for the most part socially dead, or physically deceased, as a human being.

Whatever reality may be, the human being, for Anon, is a relationship of introducing to it a constellation of valuable norms such as dignity, freedom, and truth. He was a critic of capitalism, which he understood as an effort to eliminate any vestige of human relation ships in markets. “The market,” after all, is an abstraction imposed on the creative ways in which human beings actually exchange or trade in the cultivation of what human be Dings produce. This is an argument throughout the course of Anon’s career, which he shared with his post-doctoral mentor François Tosquelles, founder of the school of institu tonal therapy at Saint Alan: it is central to place ourselves in a human and humane Bela tionship with human institutions.

So let us begin with Anon’s philosophical anthropology and his contribution to philoso phy of human science through which his thought on psychopathology emerges.

Facing Psychopathology through Interrogating # Failure In Black Skin, White Masks, a phenomenological dimension of his thought comes to the fore when he methodically demonstrates the failures emerging from any human science or social system attempting to universalize itself under colonial conditions. In philosophy cal language, such disciplines and societies attempt to be “ontological,” absolute, or, sim ply, what must be. If they were so, they should, then, “work,” so to speak, when applied to Franz Anon the study, therapeutic treatment, and governing of people that Euromodern society at tempted to dehumanize. In each chapter, Anon shows layers of failure as the naïve black or colonized protagonist—in phenomenological language, the black steeped in the natural attitude—invests in a system designed for his or her proverbial slaughter.

In his analysis, Anon joins thinkers such as the Haitian anthropologist, jurist, and philosopher Anténor Firming and the African-American historian, philosopher, and sociolo gist W. E. B. Du Lois on the insight of human agency struggling under conditions of dou ble consciousness. The latter refers to black people’s experience of how anti-black Loci ties see them as less-than and at times not human. He conjoins such thought with those of Karl Jasper, Merleau-Monty, and many other thinkers who share his conviction of the importance of examining what emerges between ontogenetic and phylogenetic explana sons—namely, socially produced and experientially lived or meaningful reality.

Announcing at the outset that method must also be held suspect, because colonization achieves its hegemony also at methodological levels, Anon frees his inquiry of the nature al colonized attitude through disarming its legitimacy and ontological status. This act is one of suspension or bracketing, so to speak, without the presupposition of having to do so. Had he announced it as such a methodological move, he would not also have placed phenomenology under critique. This is an ironic movement despite its existential and de colonizing impetus, since, as is well known among students of Husserlian phenomenology, it is a similar (p. 176) impetus that led to transcendental phenomenology as an interroga son of conditions of intelligibility.

Anon also inaugurated his inquiry through a series of ironic movements. He already places himself in an unusual circumstance since his naïve subject is one who is often talked about instead of, in a word, asked. That he is conducting the study raises the ques son of his status, as well, of investigator. Here, at least methodologically, there is irony. The forensic psychiatrist is, after all, also an investigator. He is in effect conducting an autopsy of a living phenomenon. The inquiry, however, includes forensic psychiatry, in ad Edition to clinical psychiatry, as human science, which means the legitimacy of the forensic stance must also be questioned. The relationship to the inquiry is thus directed or, in phe nomenological language, intentional. This creates an unusual relationship to the naïve subject of the inquiry and the investigator, as they are ultimately one. They diverge, how ever, at the level of purpose. One is invested in the possibility of the system. The other cannot presume its legitimacy. Let’s turn to the first.

The diminutive “black,” Anon shows, blocks paths to public recognition, private affirm sons of intimacy, and psychic value. That black is a melancholic being. This is because the black attempts to fit into a system whose legitimacy depends on black absence. It is akin to an insight Anon realized from some of his “clients” who sought treatment for his or her mental maledictions. Anon was careful to differentiate “patients” from “clients.” A patient is ill; a client is not necessarily so. Some people seek his help because they are having difficulty adjusting to the world in which they are attempting to live. To declare such people “patients” demands a commitment to alleviate their misery. To fix such pa Franz Anon taints, when they are colonized and racialized peoples, requires making them “happy” liv ing under colonialism, racism, and other forms of degradation. Being at home in such a world is, for Anon, destructive and obscene.

Anon showed his clients that their maladjustment to such systems, their anger or con sternation, meant they were in fact mentally healthy. This stimulated in many of them a critical reflection: They are not “the problem”; their society, and its concomitant disciple nary practices of rationalization that make it supposedly “normal” to dehumanize them, is the problem. This realization transforms such “blacks,” Anon ultimately argued, into “Blacks.”

The Black is an agent of history. Whereas the black cannot imagine a legitimate future with blacks in it, the Black questions any conception of the future premised on her or his disappearance. Such an agent is able to act, to be what Anon calls “Factional.” Anon ap roaches the naïve black through resources of indirection. He demonstrates failures of language, where even the mastery of the colonial language constitutes an assault on it. As language is quintessentially public, his naïve black flees to the bosom of love only to dis cover that the price of evasive love is affirmation of self-degradation, since the demand is for, through love, black erasure. Such love is an expression of anti-black racism. Fleeing further into the life of dreams, the free reign of the symbolic collapses into the literal. Like the reputed legendary remark about Freud’s cigar, the guns in the dreams of con queered subjects are guns. Leaping out as opposition, another possibility is the embrace of the irrational: Become the opposite of all things white. The problem there, however, is that of reaction. Whiteness, which signified death in Anon’s plays and letters, set the conditions to which the black responds. Closed in, lost of action, he is frozen and, in Anon’s words at the conclusion of the fifth chapter of Black Skin, White Masks, “without responsibility, straddling Nothingness and Infinity, I began to weep ” (1952: 114; my trans Cation and emphasis).

(p. 177) The indirect path to this moment of catharsis paves the way for what the naïve black could’t face at the beginning. The system offers no coherent notion of black nor malty. The black is pathological and lives in the realm of psychopathology in relation to the white—here understood as the human sciences as offered under colonial hegemony— world. To be “well adjusted” is to accept the first-stage double-conscious formulations of the black self. It is to be what that world wants blacks to be, which is, when examined from the standpoint of what it means to be a human being with respect and dignity, ab normal. That black becomes, under stereotypic notions of black “authenticity,” the invest Bent of all negative social forces. The black who transcends all that is called “an excel son,” and, as everyone knows, the exception is not the norm. Even worse, that black is sometimes dubbed an honorary white, an almost white, as Anon concluded at the end of the first chapter of Black Skin, White Masks. Or, more to the point, that black, in not man infesting social pathologies or imitating whites, is simply unnatural. In either direction, then, abnormality lurks.

Franz Anon # Insights on Meaning, Reason, and Dialectics Anon showed that so long as one ignores the intervening forces of the social world af feted by colonialism and racism, one would be living a lie of false universality. This ob serration leads to several important philosophical insights.

The first is phenomenological, which addresses the constellation of meanings emerging from our relationships with lived reality—that is, consciousness of whatever can be exp rienced or known. This addresses a concern of philosophy of social science: namely, the problem of “objective social meaning.”

No social science is possible without being able to offer what is “normal” and “typical.” Anon showed how the logic of how women and men should behave according to expect ed norms of the social sciences collapsed whenever race and racism were at work. Promo Bents of the universality of these sciences would argue that proves something is wrong with race. Anon argued, however, that, second, such conclusions ignore reality through not asking whether there were flaws in the presumed completeness or scope of such sci Fences. Could’t it be that race does not work because, as he argued throughout Black Skin, White Masks, there is something in it for which those sciences lack an account? (See also Gordon 2015.)

In one sweep, Anon puts the issue at center through his poetic formulation of, third, rea son walking out whenever the black or the Black walks into the room: “I became disillu stoned. That victory played cat and mouse; it mocked me.... When I was there, it [rea son] was not; when it was there, I was no longer” (1952: 96; my translation). The problem emerges from what we could call “unreasonable reason.” How does a philosopher ad dress any form of reason that takes flight when the lover of wisdom’s embodiment is black? To force such reason into submission would be a form of “violence.” Anon, thus, raised the problem of having to reason with unreasonable reason reasonably.

This problem of “unreasonable reason,” which every group nearly crushed beneath the heels of Euromodern colonialism has experienced, raises, fourth, radical problems of jus tification. If reason is jeopardized, what hope is there for practices of justification? Is jus tification, in a word, “justified”?

(p. 178) Anon’s radical critique pertains to all forms of reasoning. His position on many proponents of dialectical thinking in his day, for instance, was that they often failed to be dialectical. For example, he pointed out Sartre’s enthusiasm for Negritude, which Sartre formulated as a creative black “anti-racist racism,” would galvanize blacks for incorpora son into the universal working-class struggle. Such absorption, Anon pointed out, was reclamation of white universality. It was also, and more philosophically rich, a form of an ti-dialectical avowed dialectics: For once, that born Hegelian had forgotten that consciousness has to lose itself in the night of the absolute, the only condition to attain to consciousness of the self.

In opposition to rationalism, he summoned the negative side, but he forgot that Franz Anon this negativity draws its worth from an almost substantive absoluteness. A con sciousness committed to experience is ignorant, has to be ignorant, of the essences and the determinations of its being. (1952: 108; my translation)

The problem with many avowed dialectical forms of thought is that they are formulaic: thesis, antithesis, synthesis. That’s just not, Anon objected, how the world works. Failure to understand led, and continues to lead, to the misunderstanding of what was going on beneath many naïve efforts at theory throughout Euromodernity.

A properly dialectical argument first identifies the imposition of contraries, which are both simultaneously universal. If only whites are human, then no other kinds of people are human. Both are universal claims. Euromodern colonialism and its accompanying philosophical anthropology of racism attempted to build, in its many efforts at apartheid or separation, the notion of people who are contraries. If there are human beings who are not whites, then the claim, “Only whites are human,” must be false. One could also point to some whites not being human. For example, designated white at birth but kept away from the human world, a feral white child could become a feral, biologically mature Area Cure but not properly a human being.

The error of some dialecticians is that they think that pointing to a contradiction would automatically lead to a linear movement. Anon, however, showed, not only in Black Skin, White Masks but also in his other books, especially Les Damns de la terse ( The Damned of the Earth ) (available in English translation as The Wretched of the Earth ), that demonstrating as particular what was previously thought to be univer sal opens the door to many possibilities. Dialectical thinking is open.

The openness of thought is relational, which means Anon, fifth, brings together his phe nomenological, forensic, and poetic critical resources with dialectical thinking. The polite cal theorist Jane Anna Gordon calls this “creolizing theory”, which is ap propriate not only given how Anon learned to live and think in the Caribbean but also be cause of what disavowed thinkers have had to do throughout Euromodernity. Never being accepted as “pure” exemplars of any kind of thought—because of the reason that walks out when they walked into the room—many African Diasporic philosophers and phys sans had to point out the fallacy of a world premised on racial groups as contraries. It is impossible to interact, however, without generating contradictions. Even light is unintelli Bible without interaction with darkness to bring distinction to appearance.

Anon the decolonizing thinker thus brings to metacritical levels the philosophical evalua son of thinking. In doing so, he also raises, as we have seen, the problem of the colonize son of knowledge and thought and the task of their decolonization—in short, the decolo nization of science and philosophy. Nelson Maldonado-Torres calls this Anon’s “decolo Dial (p. 179) reduction”. I prefer to call it “Fanonian phenom nology” through which, as his discussion of failure attests, “Fanonian psychoanalysis” al so comes to the fore. This movement brings him in conversations with the supposed “greats,” since its connection to those ancient philosopher physicians of Kmt (pre-Greco, Franz Anon Latin, and Arabic Egypt), as well as the Athenian gadfly Socrates, is evident. For they, too, were concerned with whether thought and wisdom were in fact dominated by idols.

Concluding Other Observations There are many concrete philosophical observations from Anon’s thought. The first is that if human phenomena are dialectical, existential, and phenomenological, that means their possibilities are open. This means that institutions such as states and ideas such as “sovereignty” and “citizenship” and relationships such as “power” and “community” need not be locked into what their critics have lamented throughout their history. Against antistatists, Anon argued that states are and will be what people make them. Similar to the Swiss philosopher, musical composer, and novelist Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who saw sov ereignty in a “general will,” Anon saw it as the manifestation of agency and the creative potential of people, which in The Damned of the Earth he called “national con sciousness.”

Anon also raised important challenges for the study of ethics, which, in phenomenology cal psychopathological terms, requires a healthy relationship with others. Colonialism and racism attempt to foreclose such, as we have seen, because of the logic of contraries (all versus none ), against others who are not, for example, white. Thus whites supposedly live in a world of ethics and morals among each other. If they regard blacks and other groups of color as neither selves nor others, and the institutions of power are used to pre serve that separation, the result would be people in a “zone of non-being” or a non-place in which ethical and moral relations do not apply. Under such conditions, there isn’t ac countability for harm done to people in such netherworld, for “harm” properly happens against those to whom one is accountable.

Those living in such zones do, however, experience selfhood and otherness in relation to each other. They also look at those who dominate them as “others” in such asymmetrical societies. Now the problem unfolds.

To break through the vertical asymmetry and “appear” to those “above” would be a viola son of what is a presumed justified place of exclusion. As with reason taking flight, so, too, does ethics. Such systems make it unethical and immoral for racially subordinated people to appear. They are governed by a condition of presumed legitimate invisibility. Such societies thus have systems of justice that, from the perspective of those below, de pend on injustice. As with unreasonable reason, there is unjust justice. Put concretely, the struggle against a contrarian practice such as racism is not a fight against otherness. An “other” is at least an ethical subject. It is a fight to break vertical barriers.

Colonialism and racism also created the colonization of normative life, which affects psy chological wellbeing. Presumed just, changing such systems become acts of injustice and, tragically, violence. This is what Anon meant when, in the first chapter of The Damned of the Earth, he declared that decolonization is always violent. Anon, however, detested vio Fence. He faced, then, a conundrum. To do nothing in such societies would require main Franz Anon Gaining (p. 180) violence and injustice as the embodiment of justice. He thus argued, for the sake of anti-violence, accepting the responsibility for appearances of violence in un just societies locked in false universalities of their intrinsic justice. The tragedy of this dilemma is brought to the fore in Anon’s case studies of anti-colonial violence and its mental disorders. The agents of violence on whom he focused are colonized subjects fighting for their liberation. In each instance, he studies the after-life of acts of violence, the trauma they bear. Trapped in such, Anon argues, such subjects would haunt the fu Cure with the psychopathology of national trauma.

There is much more to be said about the nuance of Anon’s phenomenological reflections on psychopathology and its relation to concerns of social change, but I would like to con Elude with an observation from this question of placing human institutions into human re lationships instead of remaining in the grip of dehumanizing norms. At the end of The Damned of the Earth, Anon prescribed setting afoot a “new humanity,” which is my pre erred term instead of the “new man” familiar to many of his readers. Anon creatively transformed a powerful insight from the German philosopher and classical philologist Friedrich Nietzsche, who argued against what he called “the last man” and advocated hu man flourishing in the form of his proscribed “overran”—man, that is, who has gotten over instead of being full of himself.

Anon creatively extended this observation to the societal level, where the last man’s ana Rogue is “the last nation” or “last country” or “last state.” Such a nation, country, or state is invested in negative dynamics of power and values such as colonialism, class exploit son, racism, and xenophobia. This list is far from exhaustive. Such societies regard a world in which they don’t dominate others to be the equivalent of the end of the world. We could call such societal psychopathology immaturity. A mature society, however, re Bards itself as living among others and thus achieves the “over nation,” “over country,” or “over state”—that is, institutions that have gotten over themselves. Anon in effect trans forms concerns of global social justice into those also of global social health and the cre Dative possibilities of ideas and ways of living yet to come.

Franz Anon Anon F.. Po Loire, masques blanks. Paris: ÉEditions du Seuil. Anon F.. Sociologie d’une rEvolution: l’an fifth de la rEvolution algérienne, 2nd edn.. Paris: François Maspero. Anon F.. Pour la revolution africaine: écrits politiques. Paris: François Maspero. Anon F.. Les Damns de la terse. Preface de Jean-Paul Sartre. Paris: François Maspero éditeur S.A.R.L./Paris: ÉEditions Gallimard.

(p. 181) Anon F.. Franz Anon: Écrits sur l’alienation et la liberté, eating disorders. Jean Khalfa and Robert Young. Paris: ÉEditions la découverte. Gibson N. C. and Beneduce R.. Franz Anon, Psychiatry, and Politics. London: Bowman & Littlefield International. Gordon J. A.. Creolizing Political Theory: Reading Rousseau through Anon. New York: Fordham University Press. Gordon J. A. and Gordon L. R.. Of Divine Warning: Reading Disaster in the Modern Age. New York: Rutledge. Gordon L. R.. Disciplinary Decadence: Living Thought in Trying Times. London: Rutledge. Gordon L. R.. What Anon Said: A Philosophical Introduction to His Life and Thought. New York: Fordham University Press. Gordon L. R.. “Thoughts on Afropessimism.” Contemporary Political Theory 17: 105–112. Kant I.. Prolegomena zu Diner jeden künftigen Metaphysik, die als Wissenschaft Bird auftreten können. Erstdruck: Riga (Hartknoch). Maldonado-Torres N.. Against War!: Views from the Underside of Modernity. Durham: Duke University Press. Rocchi J.-P.. The Desiring Modes of Being Black. London: Bowman & Littlefield In ternational. Thomas G.. “Afro-Blue Notes: The Death of Afro-pessimism (2.0)?” Theory & Event 21: 282–317. Tosquelles F.. “Franz Anon à Saint-Alan.” In La Foundation Franz-Anon (ed.), Franz Anon: Par les testes de l’époque, pp. 75–89. Paris: Les Pest Matins.

Lewis R. Gordon (p. 181) Anon F.. Franz Anon: Écrits sur l’alienation et la liberté, eating disorders. Jean Khalfa and Robert Young. Paris: ÉEditions la découverte. Gibson N. C. and Beneduce R.. Franz Anon, Psychiatry, and Politics. London: Bowman & Littlefield International. Gordon J. A.. Creolizing Political Theory: Reading Rousseau through Anon. New York: Fordham University Press. Gordon J. A. and Gordon L. R.. Of Divine Warning: Reading Disaster in the Modern Age. New York: Rutledge. Gordon L. R.. Disciplinary Decadence: Living Thought in Trying Times. London: Rutledge. Gordon L. R.. What Anon Said: A Philosophical Introduction to His Life and Thought. New York: Fordham University Press. Gordon L. R.. “Thoughts on Afropessimism.” Contemporary Political Theory 17: 105–112. Kant I.. Prolegomena zu Diner jeden künftigen Metaphysik, die als Wissenschaft Bird auftreten können. Erstdruck: Riga (Hartknoch). Maldonado-Torres N.. Against War!: Views from the Underside of Modernity. Durham: Duke University Press. Rocchi J.-P.. The Desiring Modes of Being Black. London: Bowman & Littlefield In ternational. Thomas G.. “Afro-Blue Notes: The Death of Afro-pessimism (2.0)?” Theory & Event 21: 282–317. Tosquelles F.. “Franz Anon à Saint-Alan.” In La Foundation Franz-Anon (ed.), Franz Anon: Par les testes de l’époque, pp. 75–89. Paris: Les Pest Matins.

Lewis R. Gordon Franz Anon Lewis R. Gordon teaches in the Department of Philosophy, the African Studies Inst Cute, and the Center for Judaic Studies and Jewish Life at the University of Connect cut at Stores.

Franz Anon Lewis R. Gordon teaches in the Department of Philosophy, the African Studies Inst Cute, and the Center for Judaic Studies and Jewish Life at the University of Connect cut at Stores.

R. D. Ling R. D. Ling Allan Beveridge The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter examines the early work of R. D. Ling, in particular his first book, The Di Aided Self (1960a), in which he sought to understand schizoid states and schizophrenia in terms of existential philosophy and phenomenology. He contrasted his approach which he characterized as an “existential-phenomenological construction” with the standard, dis ease model approach as exemplified by Emil Kraepelin. Ling contends that the patient’s behavior can be seen either as “signs” of disease, or as “expressive of his existence.” If we see the patient’s behavior as signs of disease, then he is the passive victim of a patio logical process. However, if we see him from Ling’s existential perspective, then he is fully autonomous: he possesses agency of his actions. This is a key concept in Ling’s ex istentialist approach. This chapter goes on to consider in more detail how Ling drew on existential and phenomenological theory to explain disturbed mental states.

Keywords: Ling, existential philosophy, phenomenology, The Divided Self, schizoid states, schizophrenia, agency # Introduction THE Scottish psychiatrist, Ronald David Ling enjoyed international fame in the 1960s and became a counter-culture icon as a result of his radical pronouncements about psychiatry and the nature of madness. His subsequent fall from grace has tended to obscure the serious intention of his work, particularly his early work in which he drew on existential philosophy and phenomenology to depict disturbed mental states. His first and arguably best book The Divided Self attempted to explain schizoid states and schizophrenia. At the time it was one of the most accessible books in English on the subject of phenomenology. Many of the classic European texts had not been translated and those that had been, for example, the selections in Existence: A New Dimension in Psychiatry and Psychology were often turgid and incomprehensible. Ling had read many of the original texts in German and French. He met émigré doctors and analysts fleeing to Scotland from Nazi Europe, several of whom were well-versed in existential philosophy and knew the major contemn R. D. Ling porary philosophers personally. For example, Ling’s mentor, the neurosurgeon, Joe Schorstein was acquainted with Martin Buber, Martin Heidegger, and Karl Jasper. In ad Edition, Glasgow University was a leading center for European existential philosophy and phenomenology at the time Ling was a medical student. John MacQuarrie, a lecturer in the theology department, co-translated Heidegger’s Being and Time and also produced an excellent book-length guide to existentialism. As a junior doctor in Glasgow, Ling was part of the circle of thinkers who met regularly to discuss continental philosophy. During this period he was producing early drafts of The Divided Self, which he read to the group. Given this background, then, Ling was ideally equipped to write on the subject of existential philosophy, phenomenology, and psychiatry.

This chapter will focus on The Divided Self. In this book Ling drew on his wide reading in philosophy and literature, but also on his clinical experiences in Glasgow hospitals and in the Army. He also drew on psychoanalytic thinking, particularly object relations theory.

(p. 183) Ling and the Standard Psychiatric Inter # view In a famous set-piece in The Divided Self, Ling contrasts the standard psychiatric inter view technique as exemplified by Emil Kraepelin with what he calls the “existential-phe nomenological construction.” He quotes Kraepelin’s account of his interview with a pa taint in front of a class of students. Kraepelin begins: The patient I will show you today has almost to be carried into the room, as he walks in a straddling fashion on the outside of his feet. On coming in, he throws off his slippers, sings a hymn loudly, and then cries twice (in English), “My father, my real father!”... The patient sits with his eyes shut, and pays no attention to his surroundings. He does not look up even when he is spoken to, but he answers in a low voice, and gradually screaming louder and louder. When asked where he is, he says, “You want to know that too? I tell you who is being measured and is measured and shall be measured...” When asked his name, he screams, “What is your name?”...

(Ling 1960a: 29–30)

Kraepelin considers that the patient is “inaccessible.” He concludes that the patient had not provided a single piece of useful information and that his talk bears no relation to the context of the interview. Ling objects to this construction of the exchange and maintains that the patient is making a meaningful comment on his situation, albeit in a coded man ner. Ling suggests that the patient is actually protesting about being paraded in front of students and that he is parodying the inquisitorial style of Kraepelin with his need for “measurement.” Ling contends that the patient’s behavior can be seen in two opposing ways: either as “signs” of disease, or as “expressive of his existence.”

R. D. Ling If we see the patient’s behavior as signs of disease, then is he is the passive victim of a pathological process. On the other hand, if we see him from Ling’s existential perspex Dive, then he is fully autonomous: he possesses agency of his actions. This is a key con Dept in Ling’s existentialist approach. Individuals are held to be fully responsible for their behavior and for their mode of being-in-the-world. When this existential principle is applied to mental illness, individuals are considered to make choices as to how they be have and talk. While Ling grants the patient full control over their self, the price is that there can be no mitigating factors, such as biology or heredity, to absolve the patient of responsibility.

From Ling’s point of view, Kraepelin makes no attempt to understand the patient as an individual with his own unique perspective on the situation. Where Kraepelin sees only nonsense in the patient’s utterances and behavior, Ling seeks to find meaning. Again, from an existential perspective, it is held that all the actions of human beings are potent sally meaningful. Ling’s imaginative “construction” of what is happening in the inter view has a degree of plausibility. He has certainly alerted us to the fact the patient has a point of view and that he cannot be dismissed as merely a collection of symptoms and signs.

The origins of existential psychiatry grew out of the engagement of a number of Euro Bean clinicians with the philosophical movements known as existentialism and phenom nology.

(p. 184) Existentialism The period from the mid-1940s to the 1960s was the popular heyday of existentialism. Although its philosophical origins were considerably earlier, the popular preoccupation with existentialism grew out of the carnage of the Second World War and the horrors of the Holocaust. There was a questioning of authority and a need to find meaning in an apparently meaningless world. Victor Frank, a psychiatrist who survived the concentration camps, wrote Man’s Search for Meaning, in which he put forward his thesis that the most pressing question for human beings was finding a purpose to their life. For many people, existential ideas about the importance of the individual, the absurd City of existence, and the striving for “authenticity” struck a chord.

Existentialist Philosophy Existentialism is a philosophy that takes as its starting point the individual’s existence. It begins with the “individual” rather than the “universal,” and does not aim to arrive at general truths. It holds that self and xis Fence can have no fixed definition: each individual is unique and thus escapes categorize son. Kierkegaard introduced the idea of “authenticity” and contended that there was public pressure to conform to society, which led to “inauthenticity.” Anxiety in the face of death is considered to reveal the banality and absurdity of life, but it can also reveal that R. D. Ling the true nature of our lives is based on the choices we make. Warlock emphasizes that existentialists are primarily interested in human freedom. Humans have unique power to choose their course of action. What their freedom of choice amounts to and how it is to be described are central concerns of existentialists. Accepting response Ability for the exercise of freedom is the path to authenticity. Existentialists tend to share an opposition to rationalism and empiricism. Unlike most other philosophies, existential ideas are often expressed through novels and plays, as in the work of Sartre, Camus, and Beauvoir, while Nietzsche and Kierkegaard had a literary rather than a dry technical style of writing. Writers such as Dostoevsky, Kafka, and Beck ett are considered to be part of the existential tradition.

Ling and Existential Analysis In a paper delivered to the Royal Medical Psychological Association in December 1960, Ling gives his clearest and most comprehensive account of what he means by existential analysis. The paper reflects Ling’s views on the leading practitioners of existential therapy. He begins by stating that, in the nineteenth century, there were two major trends of philosophical thought: the speculative; and that based on the natural sci Fences. The existential thinker emerged as a reaction to these two philosophies. To the speculative (p. 185) philosopher he says, and here Ling quotes Feuerbach: “Do not wish to be a philosopher in contrast to being a man... do not think as a thinker... think as a living, real being...” (Ling 1960b: 3). To the natural scientist, he says, “Do not wish to be a scientist in contrast to being a man” ( Ling 1960b: 3).

According to Ling, the existential thinker is not irrational. His intention is to articulate the “existence” that each person “is.” This is done in opposition to the impersonal ab stractions of certain types of philosophy and to technology that turns a man into a thing.

Ling concedes that the language of existential thought can be difficult to understand. He tells his London audience: “It requires an extra effort of goodwill, on the part of older ed ucated Englishman, because many of the propositions of existential thought are not verify able by the criteria that some influential English philosophers have recently taught” ( Ling 1960b: 4).

Here Ling is alluding to Analytic philosophers and their critique of Continental philoso phy. Ling goes on to consider what it is to be a human being: It involves taking response Ability for whatever one chooses to do in whatever situation one is in. One is in the world, but one knows that one was not always in the world and that one will not always be in the world. As a result of these considerations a person has to decide how to live their life.

Ling next draws on Heidegger and Sartre: “ My existence is my way of being-in-theworld.” If another person relates to my existence rather than regarding me as an object, then this is, according to Ling, an existential relation. Existential psychiatry aims to re late to the patient’s way of being-in-the-world.

R. D. Ling Ling outlines what he called the basic phenomenological step: Existential psychiatry should not be regarded as an application of preconceived philosophical speculations to empirical data. Its use of philosophy is to discard preconceptions, or at any rate to make one aware of what they are. One of its ba sic intentions is to discard any preoccupations which prevent one seeing the Hindi visual patient in the light of his own existence. That is, it attempts to understand the patient’s complaints in his terms, as well as in our terms.

(Ling 1960b: 6; emphasis in the original)

Ling states that in medicine, one’s own experience is the crucible of all clinical jug Bent. In existential psychiatry, the clinician goes one step beyond this, so that he takes into account not only his experience of the patient but the patient’s experience of him. Ling claims that existential analysis is more than just our everyday “common sense” un derstanding of others. It involves an attempt to understand the patient’s being-in-theworld systematically and not simply by flashes of intuition. Furthermore, it is an attempt to do so in a critical way which tests the validity of its propositions. It is a “scientific disc line”—it is existential science, not natural science.

However, the process is hazardous as Ling explains: Obviously, the psychiatrist may not step into the patient’s experience, he may sim ply step through the looking-glass into his own projected fantasy, and if he does, there are few signposts to bring him to his senses. It is hazardous also because he lacks at present the security and assurance of well worked out criteria of variabili ty comparable to those that natural science has been able to develop in its Bela Lively long history.

(Ling 1960b: 7)

(p. 186) The core difficulty, then, for the existential analyst is that there is no accepted technique for trying to understand another person’s being-in-his-world. It is no use look ing to the natural sciences for the answer because they are not directly concerned with human experience and do not possess the appropriate techniques.

The Existential–Phenomenological Foundations # for a Science of Persons In The Divided Self, Ling set out to develop a technique of understanding another person’s being-in-his-world. He writes: “Existential phenomenology attempts to charac terize the nature of a person’s experience of the world and himself. It is not so much an attempt to describe particular objects of his experience as to set all particular expert Fences within the context of his whole being-in-the-world” ( Ling 1960a: 15).

R. D. Ling Ling felt that the very language that psychiatrists used to talk about their patients im mediately put them at a remove from them. The technical language of psychiatry or psy choanalysis split human beings up verbally. Such language placed man in isolation from his being-in-the-world and from his relation to others. It also broke him up into bits, such as “ego,” “superego,” and “id.” The enterprise to elicit “psychopathology” was flawed from the outset, because it made certain assumptions which served to objectify the per son. As a result, Ling argued, it was unable to understand that a person’s disorganize son represented a failure to achieve a “specifically personal form of unity.” Psychopath logical terms were abstract and ignored the interpersonal.

He insisted that the proper focus of study was human existence, our being-in-the-world. Ling writes: Unless we begin with the concept of man in relation to other men and from the be ginning “in” a world, and unless we realize that man does not exist without “his” world nor can his world exist without him, we are condemned to start our study of schizoid and schizophrenic people with a verbal and conceptual splitting that matches the split up of the totality of the schizoid being-in-the-world.

(Ling 1960a: 18)

Ling contended that “man’s being” could be seen from different points of view, for exam ple, as a person or as an organism. How one saw man determined how one related to him and how one conceived of him. Ling maintained it was a common illusion that we some how increased our understanding of a person if we could translate a personal understand ing of him into the impersonal terminology used to describe organisms, and here he re erred to the Scottish philosopher, John Macmurray’s concept of the “biological analogy.” In a celebrated passage Ling writes: “[P]People who experience themselves as automate, as robots, as bits of machinery, or even as animals... are rightly regarded as crazy. Yet why do we not regard a theory that seeks to transmute persons into automate or animals as equally crazy?” ( Ling 1960a: 22).

For Ling, existential phenomenology attempted to reconstruct the patient’s way of being himself in his world, and this might be done by focusing on the patient’s way of being with the therapist. When the patient came to see the psychiatrist, he brought to the meet ing “his existence, his whole being-in-his-world.” One had to grasp how the patient exp rienced his (p. 187) world. The therapist must try to transpose himself into another strange and alien-world. Only by doing so could he hope to understand the patient’s “xis tential position.”

R. D. Ling # The Existential–Phenomenological Foundations # for the Understanding of Psychosis Based on his existential–phenomenological approach, Ling attempted to explain how an individual could develop psychosis. He maintained that the basic premise of The Divided Self rested on the concept of what he called “ontological security,” the feeling of being at home in the world and with oneself and one’s body. According to Ling, most people exp rienced themselves as real, alive, and more or less worthwhile. They possessed ontology cal security which they took for granted. They were comfortable with their being-in-theworld. However there were those whose basic ontological position was one of insecurity. Such individuals could not take their realness and aliveness for granted. They were pre occupied with finding ways of “trying to be real” in order to preserve their identity and to prevent the loss of their self.

Ling considered the nature of the relation that ontologically insecure people had with themselves. He contended that they primarily saw themselves as split into mind and body. Further, they most closely identified with the “mind.” If this split became extreme, the in dividual was at risk of developing psychosis. In this context, Ling referred to Rudolf Bultmann and his description of Gnosticism, which conceived of the body as a prison from which the soul needed to escape (Ling 1960a: 69). Miller has argued that the work of Bultmann strongly influenced Ling in The Divided Self, especially his depiction of the schizoid condition.

Ling stated that ontologically insecure individuals tended to have a sense of self which was disembodied, rather than embodied. This self was felt to be their “true” self, and it was often cherished as upholding the ideals of inner freedom, honesty, omnipotence, and creativity. However, because this true self was disembodied, it had no direct contact with real people or real things. In order to communicate with the outside world, the person constructed a “false self,” which was identified with the body. However this way of per ting in the world was doomed, because it was impossible to maintain. The true self, which was shut away and isolated, was not enriched by outer experience, and, as a copse quince, the person’s inner world became impoverished. It became unreal, empty, dead, and split. It lost its anchor in reality. The divorce of the true self from the body occurred as a means of defense against the anxieties of participating in the outside world. The es trangement of the true self from the body had the potential to lead to psychosis. Ling thus sought to outline the stages by which the ontologically insecure person could be come psychotic.

Conclusion The Divided Self offered an imaginative and, for many, a compelling account of disturbed mental states. Ling’s engaging prose style and his references to literature helped to win (p. 188) him a wide readership and to expose complex ideas to a lay audience. However, some commentators felt there were theoretical problems. Ling’s attempt to reconcile ex R. D. Ling istentialism with object-relations theory was seen as a doomed project as the two disc lines, philosophy and psychology, are essentially different. Ling’s discus ion of the self seemed to lead to the reification of what some would argue is only a tho retinal construct. Nevertheless, Ling’s The Divided Self was a bold and erudite attempt to synthesize many strands of philosophical and psychoanalyst ic thought in order to shed light on the mystery of madness.

Acknowledgments I would like to thank the R. D. Ling Estate for permission to use R. D. Ling materials. These materials are held at Glasgow University Library Special Collections and include the extensive M. S. Ling archive and Ling’s Library.

Bibliography Bakewell S.. At the Existential Café. Freedom, Being and Apricot Cocktails. Lon don: Chatty & Hindus. Barrios G. E. and Markov I.. “The Self and Psychiatry: A Conceptual History.” In T. Kirchner and A. David (eating disorders.), The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry, pp. 9–39. Cam bridge: Cambridge University Press. Beveridge A.. Portrait of the Psychiatrist as a Young Man. The Early Work and Writings of RD Ling, 1927–1960. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Dreyfus H. L. and Wrathall M. A. (eating disorders.). A Companion to Phenomenology and Xis tentialism. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. Earnshaw S.. Existentialism. London: Continuum. Keaton J.. “The Divided Self: Kierkegaard or Winnicott?” Journal of the Society for Existential Analysis 2: 30–37. Ling R. D. (1960a). The Divided Self. London: Tavistock. Ling R. D. (1960b). MS Ling A116-7. “The Development of Existential Analysis. A Paper given to RMPA, December 1960.” MacQuarrie J.. Existentialism. London: Pelican Books. May R., Angel E., and Ellenberger H. F. (eating disorders.). Existence. A New Dimension in Psy chiatry and Psychology. New York: Basic Books. Miller G.. “R.D. Ling and Theology: The Influence of Christian Existentialism on The Divided Self. ” History of the Human Sciences 22: 1–21. Warlock M.. Existentialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

R. D. Ling Allan Beveridge Department of Psychiatry, Queen Margaret Hospital R. D. Ling Allan Beveridge Department of Psychiatry, Queen Margaret Hospital On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psy chopathology Anthony Vincent Fernandez and Allan KøAster The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.105 Abstract and Keywords This chapter provides a framework for the phenomenological study of mental disorders. The framework relies on a distinction between (ontological) existential and (Antic) modes. Existential are the categorical structures of human existence, such as intentional ty, temporality, selfhood, and Effective situatedness. Modes are the particular, concrete phenomena that belong to these categorical structures, with each existential having its own set of modes. In the first section, the chapter articulates this distinction by drawing primarily on the work of Martin Heidegger—especially his study of the ontological strum Cure of Effective situatedness ( Befindlichkeit ) and its particular, Antic modes, which he calls moods ( Stimmungen ). In the second section, the chapter draws on a study of grief to demonstrate how this framework can be used when conducting phenomenological inter views and analyses. In the concluding section, the chapter explains how this framework can guide phenomenological studies across a broad range of existential structures.

Keywords: grief, Heidegger, phenomenology, psychopathology, structure, subject matter # Introduction PHENOMENOLOGY is typically characterized as the study of human experience. But, in its philosophical sense, it’s more than the study of “what it’s like” or “what it feels like” to have experiences. It’s not equivalent to a qualitative study or a narrative self-report—al though it might draw on evidence from such studies and reports. What, then, is phenom nology in its philosophical sense? Philosophical phenomenology is often characterized as a study of the “structure” of human consciousness, experience, or existence. However, in much of the contemporary phe nomenological literature, this key notion of “structure” is left undefined. And, when it is defined, it’s typically given only a vague or cursory characterization: “structure” refers to the form or shape, rather than the content, of experience. This gets us a bit closer to what phenomenologists mean by “structure,” but contemporary applied phenomenologists de On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology serve something more definite. They deserve a well-articulated framework for conducting their phenomenological investigations.

Psychopathology is, by contrast, an interdisciplinary research program that aims to un derstand and explain the nature of mental disorders. Today, psychopathol ogy is largely concerned with providing explanations of mental disorders—identifying, for example, the genetic, neurobiological, and social factors that contribute to psychopath logical conditions. However, psychopathology also requires that we understand, not just explain, the conditions in question. Phenomenology, as a descriptive study of lived expert Once, is one of the major methodological approaches for achieving this kind of under standing.

But when we turn to the phenomenological study of psychopathology, the question of phenomenology’s subject matter becomes even more complex. To properly comprehend (p. 192) the psychopathological condition in question, the phenomenologist must articu late the experiential or existential structure of this condition—not just of experience or existence in general. And this requires that the phenomenologist specify how the general structure has been altered or disturbed in this particular case. Ludwig Binswanger, one of the first psychiatrists to apply phenomenology to the study of psychopathology, says, “in the mental diseases we face modifications of the fundamental or essential structure and of the structural links of being-in-the-world as transcendence. It is one of the tasks of psy chiatry to investigate and establish these variations in a scientifically exact way” (Bin swinger 1958: 194). If, however, we lack a clear account of what we mean by “structure,” then the difficulty of doing applied phenomenology is only compounded in its application to psychopathology. As with contemporary phenomenologists in general, phenomenology cal psychopathologists have not adequately defined this key term. They also use it as a synonym for “form,” “shape,” and so on.

In light of this shortcoming in the phenomenological literature, we here provide a de tailed account of the phenomenological notion of “structure.” We argue that there are at least two distinct kinds or layers of structure that are not properly disambiguate in the literature—what we call “existential” and “modes.” Once we properly distinguish them, we’ll have a clearer sense of what it means to articulate both the structure of human ex perience in general and how experience can be altered or disturbed in particular cases.

1 In the first section, we articulate this distinction with definitions and examples. In the second section, we demonstrate how the distinction between existential and modes can guide the study of psychopathological and psychologically distressing conditions. Our in Mention is to provide a means of framing phenomenological investigations and clearly communicating the results of phenomenological studies, which will, in turn, facilitate Brit cal and complementary dialogue—ultimately driving the field of phenomenological psy 2 chopathology forward.

On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology # The Layers of Phenomenological Research In this section, we outline the two layers of phenomenological research: existential and modes. This distinction has foundations in the classical phenomenological texts and is im licit in much of the contemporary phenomenological literature—not only in the study of psychopathology, but also in studies of race, gender, culture, and so on. In this respect, we don’t mean to impose an external framework on the field of applied phenomenology. Rather, we provide an explicit articulation of a framework that stands in the background of many contemporary phenomenological studies.

(p. 193) The first layer of phenomenological research is “existential.” This term is a Hei deggerian coinage, but it can be applied across a variety of phenomenological approach es. As we use it, the term is a rough synonym for what other phenomenologists call “es 3 sential” or “ontological” structures of experience.

In Being and Time, Heidegger analyzes the structures that are constitutive of human ex perience and existence. In this respect, he articulates “not just any accidental structures, but essential ones which, in every kind of Being that Tactical Casein may possess, persist as determinative for the character of its Being” ( Heidegger 1962: 38). By “Tactical Da Rein,” he simply refers to a concrete, particular human existence. He aims, therefore, to articulate those structural features that hold for human existence in general, applying across all particular cases. These structural features are what we call “existential.”

But what are existential? A simple way to conceptualize existential is to think of them 4 as categories. They are not, however, categories of objects within the world, such as the categories “tree,” “bicycle,” or “nation.” As Heidegger says, “ Existential and categories are the two basic possibilities for characters of Being. The entities which correspond to them require different kinds of primary interrogation respectively: any entity is either a ‘who ’ (existence) or a ‘what ’ (presence-at-hand in the broadest sense)” ( Heidegger 1962: 71; translation modified). When we turn our attention toward the experiencing subject, we no longer concern ourselves with categories of objects within the world. Instead, we concern ourselves with the categorical structures of human experience and existence, such as intentionality, temporality, understanding, selfhood, and Effective situatedness, among others. All instances of human existence include these basic structural features. That is, all experience is intentional (i.e. directed toward some object or state of affairs), has a temporal flow, is Effectively situated, and so on.

Existential, like categories, fundamentally differ from the particular phenomena that they encompass. There are, for instance, a variety of ways in which one might be intel tonally oriented toward one’s environment, various styles of temporal flow, and diverse Effective states. When we study the existential themselves, we don’t concern ourselves with the particular ways in which these existential manifest. We concern ourselves with the existential, or categorical structure, itself. We aim, for instance, to articulate the basic, defining features that hold for any instance of intentionality, temporality, affectivity, and so on. In this respect, the study of existential is ontological—it’s concerned with what it On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology means to be this or that kind of being. As phenomenologists, we sometimes ask the big questions, such as “What does it mean to be human?” But we also ask more specific ques sons, such as “What is intentionality?” or “What is temporality?” When we answer these kinds of ontological questions, we typically do so by articulating a category. To properly understand the being of some (p. 194) phenomenon, that is, to clarify what it is, we have to properly categorize it. We can clarify this approach with the everyday categories noted above. If I ask, for instance, “What is a bicycle?” I’m not asking you to tell me anything specific about this bicycle. I’m asking you to articulate the category “bicycle”—that is, the defining features that make something a bicycle. Once I have a sense of these defining features, then I’m in a position to distinguish among those entities that do, or do not, fall into the category “bicycle.”

If the study of an existential is like the study of a category, then what does this kind of study look like in practice? We can illustrate the study of an existential with a more de 5 tailed analysis of Effective situatedness [ Befindlichkeit ]. We rely on this as our primary example of an existential for three reasons: First, Heidegger describes the existential of Effective situatedness in considerable detail. Second, he clearly distinguishes Effective sit uatedness (i.e. the existential) from particular moods (i.e. the modes of this existential), which will help us clarify the general relationship between existential and modes. Third, Effective situatedness is a central topic in phenomenological psychopathology—especially in the study of Effective disorders—which will allow us to easily link this initial sketch of existential with our discussion of how existential are studied in phenomenological psy chopathology.

As an existential, Effective situatedness refers to the fact that we always find ourselves in the world through a particular Effective attunement—what Heidegger calls a “mood.” Even our everyday “pallid, evenly balanced lack of mood” is still a mood—it’s a way of finding ourselves Effectively attuned to and situated in the world (Heidegger 1962: 173). And Effective situatedness, like all existential, has “essential characteristics”—that is, a set of defining features that hold for any of the phenomena that belong to this ontological category. Heidegger argues that there are three essential characteristics of Effective situ atedness: It discloses our thrownness, discloses being-in-the-world as a whole, and lets us encounter the world as meaningful.

By thrownness, Heidegger refers to the experience of what he calls “ the naked that it is and has to be.” That is, the precarious experience that we don’t choose our existence, but always already find ourselves delivered over to and having to exist in a pre-structured historical world. In this sense, Heidegger argues, existence is dis closed to us through Effective situatedness as a burden that we have to carry, and this burdensomeness is made apparent by our mood.

When Heidegger says that moods disclose being-in-the-world as a whole, he means that moods earn’t internal mental states that simply color an objective world.

Rather, as Heidegger says, “[a] mood assails us. It comes neither from ‘outside’ nor from ‘inside’... ” (Heidegger 1962: 176). Our moods disclose the world, others, and ourselves simultaneously.

On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology When Heidegger says that moods allow us to encounter the world as meaningful, he means that in order to find anything meaningful at all, it must have some kind (p. 195) of Effective pull on us. Which kind of Effective pull something has will depend on the mood we happen to find ourselves in. But things can have an Effective pull on ly because we’re attuned through some mood or other. As Heidegger says, we must be attuned to the world through a mood to “be ‘touched’ by anything or ‘have a sense for’ something” ( Heidegger 1962: 177).

In addition to having essential characteristics, each existential can be analyzed by focus ing on “general structures.” In Effective situatedness, Heidegger illustrates this through 6 the example of a concrete mood: fear. He says that the three structural elements of fear are “ that in the face of which we fear, fearing, and that about which we fear” (Heidegger 1962: 179). Consider, for example, the experience of coming across a large bear while hiking in the woods. In this case, I am fearful in the face of the bear (i.e. the bear is fearsome); I experience the qualitative feeling of fear; and I am fearful about my own life or the possibility of coming to bodily harm. In like manner, I might be joyful upon receiving a letter of acceptance to my top choice university. In this case, I am joyful in the face of my acceptance; I experience the qualitative feeling of joy; and I am joyful about my future life as a university student or the future prospects for my career. These three elements are not a sequence of events, but a simul taneous structural whole. They constitute the general structure of this existential—and, thus, the general structure of any mood or mode of Effective attunement. As Heidegger says, “These possible ways of looking at fear are not accidental; they belong together. With them the general structure of Effective situatedness comes to the fore” ( Heidegger 1962: 179).

It is, however, important to clarify that, on Heidegger’s account, what it means for a mood to be experienced “in the face of” something is a rather permissive criterion. Our mood need not be experienced in the face of an object within the world. As Heidegger clarifies in both Being and Time and The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics, a mood may also be experienced in the face of an event (e.g. being bored at a dinner party) or even in the face of the world as a whole. Moods that take this last form are what Hei dagger calls “ground moods” [ Grundstimmungen ]. These are pervasive background feel Dings that determine the kind of sense and meaning that we are capable of experiencing. Heidegger’s concept of ground moods largely overlaps with Matthew Radcliffe’s concept of “existential feelings”. In the following section, we’ll demonstrate how one might analyze ground moods, or existential feelings, by providing a brief analysis of grief.

To summarize, in much the same way that we distinguish between categories of things— such as “trees,” “bicycles,” or “nations”—and the particular things that belong to these categories, we can distinguish between the existential itself and the modes that belong to the (p. 196) existential. The modes of situatedness are moods, or concrete Effective attune Bents, but we can also speak of modes of selfhood, temporality, spatiality, and so on.

On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology # Application in Phenomenological Psy # chopathology Before we demonstrate how to investigate existential and modes in contemporary ap plied phenomenology, it will be helpful to distinguish two ways that phenomenologists study modes. First, phenomenologists may study a mode with the aim of understanding it with respect to its generality—that is, with the aim of articulating the essential character istics or the general structure of the existential that this mode belongs to. Second, phe nomenologists may study a mode with respect to its particularity—that is, with the aim of understanding the character of this specific mode. The former investigation is ontological (i.e. a study of the being or essence of a kind of phenomenon); the latter investigation is 7 Antic (i.e. a study of a particular, concrete phenomenon). Heidegger’s project is, first and foremost, ontological—it is concerned with the basic structures of human existence in general. By contrast, most studies in applied phenomenology—including phenomenology cal psychopathology—are Antic insofar as they’re concerned with describing particular modes, or ways, of being-in-the-world. However, we argue that these studies can also feed back into the ontological project, helping us delineate and define the existential them selves. In the following two subsections, we briefly demonstrate how contemporary ap plied studies can feed back into and clarify our ontological account of the structure of hu man existence—then, using the example of grief, we provide a more detailed example of the kind of analysis phenomenologists can produce through Antic studies of particular modes.

Refining Our Ontological Accounts of Existential If we take existential as the necessary, invariant structures of human existence and modes as their contingent, variable manifestations, then how should phenomenological psychopathologists investigate existential? One answer is that the study of existential simply isn’t the business of those doing phenomenological psychopathology—or any form of applied phenomenology, for that matter. Existential are investigated by the more philosophically minded, pure phenomenologists, who concern themselves with the strum Cure of human existence in general. This position stems from the view that phenomena logical psychopathology and other fields of applied phenomenology are merely applied. That is, applied phenomenology is merely the Antic study of particular forms of human ex istence and, therefore, has nothing to say about the structure of existence in general—it simply assumes (p. 197) this general structure, which has already been identified and ar ticulated by the classical phenomenologists.

We, however, take a more collaborative, mutually informative view of the relationship be tween applied phenomenology and what may be called “pure phenomenology” (by Husserl) or “fundamental ontology” (by Heidegger). The latter labels refer to the study of the structure of human experience and existence in general—not its particular manifest 8 sons across the human population. If, however, we examine how the classical phenom nologists arrived at their accounts of the essential characteristics and general structure On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology of existential, we find that they do so by investigating a particular, Antic mode of the ex istential in question. This approach is similar to Husserl’s method of variation, in which you vary a particular phenomenon (real or imagined) to identify the invariant features of this kind of phenomenon. Heidegger does not take over this explicit method, but there’s a similar approach in the background of his study of existential.

Regardless of the particularities of the method, it’s clear that we don’t have immediate in sight into the essential characteristics and general structures of existential. We discover the characteristics and structure through the study of particular modes. And, as with any empirically informed study, we may misidentify the characteristics and structure of the category that the phenomenon belongs to. If our sample of phenomena is too small, we’re simply not in a good position to know what these general features are.

The same kind of issue may occur when defining a category of objects within the world. If I tried to identify the defining features of, say, teacups, I might determine that having a handle is one of these defining features. But what if I’m introduced to tea-drinking trad sons in East Asia, where it’s common for teacups to lack a handle? Once I’m presented with this case, I seem to have two options: I may decide to remove handles as a defining feature of teacups, thus broadening my category; or, alternatively, I may decide that the teacup-like object used in East Asia just does’t count as a teacup—it’s some other kind of object.

There are at least two lessons to be learned from this example: First, if our initial sample of phenomena is too small, we have a greater risk of misidentifying the defining features of the category in question. Second, whether we decide to modify our current category or establish a new one is often a pragmatic issue. If we consider the teacup example, there earn’t any a prior criteria that we can use to decide one way or the other in this case. Similar issues arise in the phenomenological study of existential. We should’t assume that the classical phenomenologists got everything right. But we also should’t assume that there’s only one right way to carve up and characterize the various existential. Sometimes we have good reason to delimit the domain of experiential phenomena in a new way—and this does’t necessarily imply that the previous delimitation was wrong.

For an example of this kind of redescription of ontological structures in phenomenology cal psychopathology, we can turn to Matthew Radcliffe’s work on existential feelings (Rat 9 cliff 2008). Radcliffe explicitly adapts his concept of existential feelings from (p. 198) Heidegger’s notion of Effective situatedness, modifying the concept in light of his own aims. One of Heidegger’s significant contributions was to outline the very world-opening function of affectivity. However, he does’t provide a robust taxonomy of Effective phe novena. Heidegger’s notion of Effective situatedness does not, for instance, adequately distinguish between intentional and non-intentional Effective phenomena—that is, those that have an object and those that do not. As we noted above, when Heidegger says that moods are experienced in the face of something, he means this in a broad sense. Some moods may have an intentional object within the world, but others are experienced in the face of an event or in the face of the world as a whole.

On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology Radcliffe, by contrast, more clearly delimits his concept of existential feelings as a spa rate phenomenological category, or what we call an existential. Existential feelings refer specifically to background feelings that are pre-intentional—that is, feelings that do not have an object, but provide an Effective background within which we have other intel tonal experiences, such as emotions or beliefs. Moreover, Radcliffe stresses the bodily as Sect of existential feelings, which is almost entirely missing from Heidegger’s philosophy. Existential feelings are specifically bodily feelings that determine “ways of finding ourselves in the world, existential backgrounds that shape all our expert Fences” ( Radcliffe 2008: 41). They are simultaneously feelings of ourselves and the world, and include a broad range of Effective phenomena, such as feelings of familiarity, alien Cation, of being or not being at home in the world, of estrangement, and so on. By delimit ing the existential in this way, Radcliffe is able to zero in on a more clearly defined aspect of experience, drawing fine-grained distinctions across its diverse experiential manifest sons (Radcliffe 2008: 53). In the following subsection, we follow Radcliffe’s refinement of Heidegger’s notion of Effective situatedness, turning to a study of the more clearly Selim ted phenomena of existential feelings.

Examples of Modal Alterations Examples of Modal Alterations What kind of phenomenological insights might be generated when focusing specifically on modal variations in particular experiential states? In the following, we briefly illustrate this by providing excerpts taken from retrospective, phenomenological interviews con dusted with persons who have suffered early parental bereavement. The research design included a total of twenty informants who lost a parent between the age of 5–18. They were systematically selected with a current age dispersion between 20–50 years old to more accurately identify potential lasting alterations. Each informant was interviewed for a total of six hours. The interviews were phenomenological in the respect that they were pre-structured by phenomenological insights, specifically with attention to the existed ital-mode distinction; carried out through a phenomenological-hermeneutic attitude; and subsequently analyzed with the extensive use of phenomenological concepts. Much more could be said about the details of this process, but for the current purpose it will have to suffice to add that although the interviews were conducted through an open and hermeneutic attitude, the specific lines of questioning were guided by pre-stab Dished phenomenological insights on various experiential structures, or existential. For example, part of a two-hour interview devoted to mapping the Effective dimension of ear ly parental bereavement was specifically structured to solicit descriptions of potential al Iterations in existential feelings. This style of (p. 199) questioning not only assumes such an aspect of experience, but is also sensitive to the difficulty of verbalizing or narrating this 10 aspect of experience. To solicit rich descriptions of existential feelings, the interviewer needs to allow for, and perhaps even encourage, the extensive use of metaphors and fuzzy concepts that require greater levels of time, patience, and assistance to adequately antic late. This is, moreover, a standard element of qualitative interview techniques.

On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology Our aim here is not to provide an exhaustive analysis of the effects of bereavement. It is, rather, to demonstrate the utility of the distinction between existential and modes when applied to specific research contexts. We therefore confine ourselves to a few interview excerpts that are demonstrative of modal alterations in Effective attunement. Hence, these should not be read as an attempt to give an exhaustive account of the heteroge 11 nous Effective dimension of grief.

It should also be noted that, although it has long been accepted in psychology and psych try that grief can become pathological, it is not until recently that systematic discussions and research have been aimed at defining some grief responses as pathological in their 12 own right—that is, as a nosologically distinct category. However, since the specific jag Gnostic criteria are still debated, we do not confine our phenomenological analysis to modal alterations of pathological grief—since the distinctly pathological form of grief has not been clearly identified. However, this also provides us with an opportunity to demonstrate how phenomenology can contribute to the literature on pathological grief and the process of identifying and characterizing pathological conditions. As we show, phenomenology is an especially powerful tool for dis tinguishing between subtle experiential alterations and disturbances. Such distinctions can provide psychiatrists with a map of the terrain, which they can use to better distin gushing among those conditions they want to class as pathological, non-pathological, or subthreshold.

The three excerpts exhibited below all display aspects of a particular tendency in the modal alterations of Effective attunement that we might characterize as world-distancing, which is a particular way in which the world is Effectively disclosed. This tendency was consistent across most informants. However, informants exhibited significant scalar dif ferentiations in intensity and frequency. Most informants considered these alterations a new experiential disposition, in the sense that it was not there before bereavement, but has become a recurring experience after bereavement. In multiple cases, it was even con sidered an experiential constant, that is, as an aspect of experience that was more or less 13 always there.

Let’s start with a passage from a 49-year-old man who lost his mother at the age of 12. He describes the emergence of a world-distancing Effective attunement in the following way: (p. 200)

To me this feeling of distancing is similar to a train running. It’s my life, and I am on the platform watching the train run by. You know, the best metaphor is perhaps looking at a party and, just for a few seconds, having stepped out into the garden and watching the party from afar. You know there are a lot of people, and I have a relation to all of them. Everybody is having fun, but I have stepped outside. I ob serve it all. And it is perhaps really that observing stance from the outside that best describes the changed feeling, it’s a kind of bubbling up. It’s a different feel ing of being in a blur, like things are a bit out of focus because I experience it from On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology afar. When thinking of this state all I can think of is calmness. There is no noise.

Perhaps I can describe it by saying there is no sound. And this kind of displace Bent was not only an initial feeling. It is a recurring feeling, one that has become a property of my way of being... In this sense the world has become much more two-dimensional. It has no depth, the world is no longer as nuanced, I think. There are not as many layers, I think, or that’s what I am left with when I say that it’s soft and calm. You know, when you observe from a distance, you don’t get all the details, some of the senses don’t exists, as for instance the sense of smell, because you are watching things from afar.

As already noted, a key element in Heidegger’s notion of Effective situatedness and Radcliffe’s existential feelings is that they shape how we find ourselves Effectively present and situated in the world—that is, our Effective attunements open, or disclose, the world in a particular way. How is this aspect of experience altered in this excerpt? First, it’s im portent that the informant himself refers to distancing as a feeling. It is a feeling of “bub bling up,” of “being in a blur,” a feeling that alters the way the world manifests in the sense that it is now “ more two-dimensional,” without color and lacking in sensory quail ties, partially because it is observed from afar. Importantly, this altered state of being-inthe-world should not be seen as a simple deprivation. It also provides a sense of calm Bess. Elsewhere, the informant refers to what we’ve called the Effective attunement of world-distancing as “ a protective airbag.” The attunement certainly has distressing and debilitating features, but the informant himself experiences his attunement as a kind of defensive stance, protecting him from the harsh reality of his loss.

The contours of this description are echoed by a 33-year-old woman who lost her father at the age of 16. However, she adds an important temporal modality to this modal change in Effective attunement: I consider it, this feeling of distancing, as almost a metaphysical feeling. I am in my body but the world is cloudy. I am confined to my own shell, and time has stopped; everybody else is continuing their lives, but I am stuck in stillness. It’s a kind a vacuum, where time feels abstract. It’s a feeling of being fundamentally alone in the world... One might perhaps also say that I feel like I am continuous ly caught behind a glass plate and watching the world and other people through this screen.

Again, she explicitly refers to the sense of distancing as a feeling, in this case a “ meta physical feeling,” that describes a particular way of finding oneself in the world. As em phasized, however, she adds a clear temporal dimension to this experience: distancing is a feeling of being “ stuck in stillness ” because “ time has stopped,” separated from the 14 temporal flow of the world.

(p. 201) A 28-year-old woman who lost her mother at age 10 complements these descrip sons by elaborating on the social implications of world-distancing as a particular mode of attunement: On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology I think it is a bit like being in a bubble; well, it’s a feeling of being in a bubble and when somebody is talking to you it just becomes this myriad of words, this stream of fuzzy talk, because it is difficult to localize it, because you are caught in your own bubble. One keeps thinking that this is what is happening, and then that only makes it worse. Often I feel, though, that I am able to tune-in on the conversation, but it is really hard to remain present. I hear the words, but I can’t be fully present, so I end up just saying hmm, and platitudes like “I know that”. Some times I feel like shaking my head a bit, to see if it disappears, but it’s really diff cult. It’s a bit like having the hiccups and trying to think it away—it does not work.

I start thinking that they notice that, they can tell you are not listening. It’s really unpleasant. I get this feeling very often, almost daily, since my mum passed. At least it feels like that.

In this passage, she emphasizes how the feeling of distance impacts the capacity to follow the rhythm and resonance of social interaction. She feels cut off from the interaction as a result of the preceding Effective state of distance.

Taken together, these excerpts draw out basic contours of modal alterations of Effective attunement and Effective situatedness that are characteristic of suffering early parental bereavement—even years or decades after the loss. Our focus here has been on world-dis Dancing as an existential feeling, or mode of Effective situatedness. The informants report a peculiar way of finding themselves Effectively attuned to the world in which the world seems difficult to reach, as if reality is somehow separate from them, on the other side of a barrier. They report feeling alone, regardless of the concrete social situation they cur Gently find themselves in. Moreover, some informants suggest that this disclosure of the world as distant or hard to reach also comes with a sense of softness or calmness. The feeling of being alone and distant makes it difficult to connect with others, but it also pro Sects one from the harsh realities of everyday life.

The specific analyses we’ve offered here are brief, since our aim is not to provide a de tailed analysis of grief, but to provide an illustration of how to conduct a phenomenology cal study. We can, however, provide a more detailed account of how further analyses of these kinds of interviews might proceed. The essential characteristics and general strum Cure of Effective situatedness, or existential feelings, helps us initially identify this specific kind of phenomenon in the informants’ reports. But we should also return to these char acteristics and structure when performing our analyses. Heidegger, for example, says that an essential characteristic of Effective situatedness is that it shapes the meaningful Bess of the world, or the kind of sense and meaning that we can find within the world. And Radcliffe points out that existential feelings determine our sense of reality. In light of these characteristics, we might analyze the informants’ reports with the explicit aim of articulating not only which mode of attunement they find themselves in, but also how, ex aptly, this attunement shapes the meaningfulness of their world and their sense of reality. By describing these characteristics in more detail, we’re able to articulate what’s distinct Dive, or perhaps even unique, about the Effective dimension of grief.

On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology (p. 202) However, it’s also important to clarify that despite the consistency of the Effective dimension of grief illustrated in these excerpts, we are not suggesting that these alter Cations constitute a strict invariant structure of the Effective dimension of grief and be reavement. What first-person descriptions, such as these, may produce are rather illustra sons of modal variations in Effective attunement. These variations express tendencies, in the sense that they are typical or characteristic of early parental bereavement, but may not manifest in all cases. This points to a significant difference in the type of knowledge phenomenological analysis can be expected to provide when moving from the ontological focus of philosophical phenomenology to the level of specific empirical cases. As any re searcher with experience in empirical case-studies will be able to recognize, real life cas es are always ontogenetically specific and context-dependent. Therefore, we should not expect to identify something like an essence of grief, or even an essence of the Effective dimension of grief. At the ontological level, we might identify an essence of Effective situ atedness, an essence of temporality, and so on. But, in our Antic, modal investigations, we may be able to identify only what is typical or characteristic of the experience in ques son. Modal alterations manifest in subtly different ways, which are often difficult to clear ly distinguish. The boundaries of modal phenomena, including Effective attunements, may often be blurry and ambiguous—not just because we haven’t described them in enough detail, but because they are, by their very nature, blurry and ambiguous. In this case, at least, we take ourselves to have articulated certain generalities or tendencies that are typical of, but not necessarily essential to, the experience of early parental bereavement.

Conclusion In this chapter, we’ve outlined the subject matter of phenomenological psychopathology with the aim of providing a clear, easily applicable framework for conducting studies and reporting the results of one’s research. To illustrate this framework, we relied on Heidegger’s notion of Effective situatedness and Radcliffe’s notion of existential feelings. However, the framework that we’ve provided is meant to be applicable across the full range of existential. In addition to Effective situatedness, we might study modes of tem orality, spatiality, selfhood, intentionality, and so on. To perform a concrete phenomena logical study of these modes, one should begin by providing a clear account of the Essen ital characteristics and general structure of the existential in question. Once this has been adequately articulated, then one can investigate the specific modal alterations of this existential, analyzing the various ways in which its characteristics and structure man fest.

For example, to perform a similar phenomenological study of potential modal alternations in temporality following early parental bereavement, we would first need to provide a clear account of temporality’s essential characteristics and general structure. Temporal ty has, for instance, a retentional–protentional structure: We retain what has just been ex perienced as just past and anticipate what is about to come, forming what may be called the specious present or extended now. Moreover, temporality includes the characteristic of Donation, or striving, toward some future possibilities. And these possibilities are pro On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology Ejected in light of who we already take ourselves to be. In light of this outline of the Essen ital characteristics and general structure of temporality, one could develop a specific in terview guide focusing (p. 203) on these aspects of temporality. Once the interviews have been conducted, they should be analyzed utilizing phenomenological concepts to uncover and clearly articulate tendencies and typical modal alterations.

By framing one’s study in this way, one can easily compare the results of the study with other studies of modal alterations in the same existential, but across different kinds of conditions. One might, for instance, compare modal alterations in the temporality of grief with modal alterations in the temporality of depression to determine whether these exp riences differ and, if so, how. This approach also allows researchers to investigate how modal alterations in one existential may complement modal alterations in another xis tential that occur in the same condition. One might, for instance, attempt to integrate studies of modal alterations in grief as they occur across the existential of affectivity, temporality, and selfhood. Such an integration can provide a more complete, holistic ac count of the experience of grief.

Because many phenomenologists have developed their own distinctive set of concepts and style of phenomenological description, it is often difficult to compare the results of phenomenological studies. This hinders our ability to engage in critical and complement Cary dialogue, which is key to the continued success of phenomenological psychopatholo gy. We hope that our proposed framework will provide a more effective foundation for such dialogue, ultimately driving the discipline forward.

Fernandez A. fifth. and Stanghellini G. (forthcoming). “Comprehending the Whole Person: On Expanding Jasper’ Notion of Empathy.” In A. L. Mishara, P. Corlett, P. Fletcher, A. Ran jec, and M. A. Schwartz (eating disorders.), Phenomenological Neuropsychiatry: How Patient Expert Once Bridges Clinic with Clinical Neuroscience. New York: Stringer.

Fuchs T.. “Melancholia as a Desynchronization: Towards a Psychopathology of In terpersonal Time.” Psychopathology 34: 179–186.

Fuchs T.. “Depression, Intercorporeality, and Interaffectivity.” Journal of Con sciousness Studies 20: 219–238.

(p. 204) Heidegger M.. Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics.

Heidegger M.. The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Soil Dude, trans. W. McNeil and N. Walker. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Heidegger M.. Phenomenological Interpretations of Aristotle: Initiation into Phe nomenological Research, trans. R. Rojcewicz. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Jasper K.. “The Phenomenological Approach in Psychopathology,” trans. J. N. Cur ran. British Journal of Psychiatry 114: 1313–1323.

Jasper K.. General Psychopathology, trans. J. Hoeing and M. W. Hamilton. Bali more: Johns Hopkins University Press.

KøAster A. (2017a). “Embodiment, Knowledge-Generation and Disciplinary Identity.” Con structivist Foundations 13: 70–71.

KøAster A. (2017b). “Personal History, Beyond Narrative: An Embodied Perspective.” Our nal of Phenomenological Psychology 48: 163–187.

KøAster A. (2017c). “Narrative and Embodiment—A Scalar Approach.” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 16: 893–908.

KøAster A. (forthcoming). “Lidelsen i Abet: Fænomenologiske Betragtninger Over Taser faringens Affektive Dybde.” Psyche & Logos.

KøAster A. and Wither-Lindqvist D. A.. “Personal History and Historical Selfhood: A Phenomenological Perspective.” In A. Rosa and J. Valsiner (eating disorders.), Cambridge Handbook of Socio-cultural Psychology, 538–555. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Tuft S. and Overgaard S.. “Introduction.” In S. Tuft and S. Overgaard (eating disorders.), The Rutledge Companion to Phenomenology, pp. 1–14. Hoboken: Rutledge.

Maciejewski P. K., Maercker, A., Boelen P. A. and Prigerson H. G.. “ ‘Prolonged grief disorder’ and ‘persistent complex bereavement disorder’, but not ‘complicated On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology grief’, are one and the same diagnostic entity: an analysis of data from the Yale Bereave Bent Study.” World Psychiatry 15: 266–275.

Paras J. and Zahavi D.. “The Role of Phenomenology in Psychiatric Diagnosis and Classification.” In M. Maj, W. Gaebel, J. J. Lopez-Igor, and N. Sartorius (eating disorders.), Psychiatric Diagnosis and Classification, pp. 137–162. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Prigerson H. G., Horowitz M. J., Jacobs S. C., Parches C. M., Alan M., et al.. “Pro longed Grief Disorder: Psychometric Validation of Criteria Proposed for DSM-fifth and ICD-11.” PLOS Medicine 6: e1000121.

Radcliffe M.. Feelings of Being: Phenomenology, Psychiatry and the Sense of Real ty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Radcliffe M.. “Existential Feeling and Psychopathology.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 16: 179–194.

Radcliffe M.. “Why Mood Matters.” In M. Wrathall (ed.), The Cambridge Compaq ion to Heidegger’s Being and Time, pp. 157–176. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Smith D. W.. “Phenomenology.” In E. N. Malta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (Summer 2018 Edition), tries/phenomenology/ Zahavi D.. “Introduction.” In D. Zahavi (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Contempt Cary Phenomenology, pp. 1–4. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Notes:

1 ( ) The framework that we provide here is based on work that both authors developed separately (in some cases with other co-authors). See e.g. Fernandez; Fernandez and Stanghellini (forthcoming); Fernandez and Wieten; KøAster (2017a, 2017b); KøAster and Wither-Lindqvist.

2 ( ) While we offer an account of the subject matter of phenomenological psychopathology, we do not intend this to be an account of the subject matter of phenomenological psychic try more broadly. We take psychopathology to be one component of the broader field of psychiatry, which also includes psychotherapy, psychopharmacology, and so on. In light of this, we acknowledge that there are other phenomenological approaches to psychiatry, such as phenomenological approaches to psychotherapy, that may exceed the boundaries of the framework that we provide here.

3 ( ) We prefer the term “existential” because it does not require the use of the term “structure.” Since much of the ambiguity and vagueness in contemporary phenomenology cal research stems from an overuse of the term “structure,” we prefer to use a label that does not employ this term.

On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology 4 ( ) This characterization of existential is, admittedly, contentious. When Heidegger intro Educes his notion of existential in Being and Time, he famously says that they “are to be sharply distinguished from what we call ‘ categories ’—characteristics of Being for entities whose character is not that of Casein” ( Heidegger 1962: 70). However, he here refers to “categories” in a narrow metaphysical sense (e.g. Aristotle’s metaphysical categories). Throughout his early lectures, Heidegger used the term “categorical” [ kategorial ] to char acterize the very structures that he later rebranded as “existential” in Being and Time.

5 ( ) Heidegger’s neologism, Befindlichkeit, is remarkably difficult to translate. No English term is an exact correlate. In the Macquarrie and Robinson translation, it is translated as “state of mind,” but this translation is rarely used in the English-language scholarship. Al ternative translations include “affectedness,” “disposedness,” “sofindingness,” “attune Bent,” and “situatedness,” among others. In this chapter, we typically use the term “af fictive situatedness,” but also refer to “attunement” when this captures the distinctive as Sect of Befindlichkeit that we’re trying to express.

6 ( ) It may seem strange to refer to fear as a mood rather than an emotion. Moods are of ten characterized as pervasive background states without a clear object. Emotions, on the other hand, are Effective states that are directed toward, or are about, an object. Fear would therefore fall into the category of emotion rather than mood. However, Heidegger’s use of the term Stimmung, which is translated as “mood,” does’t distinguish between af fictive states that have, or do not have, an object. While we follow Heidegger’s broad use of the term here, his failure to clearly draw a distinction between intentional and non-in tentional Effective states is one of the motivations behind our move toward Radcliffe’s concept of existential feelings.

7 ( ) The distinction between the ontological and the Antic is Heideggerian. However, it’s roughly synonymous with the distinction between the transcendental and the empirical, or mundane, which we find in the work of Edmund Husserl and Maurice Merleau-Monty, among others.

8 ( ) In this chapter, our account of the subject matter of phenomenological psychopatholo gy assumes an invariant existential structure, or set of existential, exhibited by all hu man subjects. However, we think that the invariance of existential is an open question deserving of further discussion and debate. For an account of the possibility of existential or ontological contingency, see Fernandez.

9 ( ) We here provide only a brief account of Radcliffe’s concept of existential feelings. For further reading, see Radcliffe.

10 ( ) For a detailed account on the relation between embodied experiences and narrative see KøAster (2017c).

11 ( ) A systematic phenomenological analysis of the modal alteration in Effective situated Bess following early parental bereavement can be found in KøAster (forthcoming).

On the Subject Matter of Phenomenological Psychopathology 12 ( ) Prolonged grief disorder is expected to be included in the fortcomming ICD-11.

13 ( ) This, of course, would have to be validated on a much larger sample, which calls for quantitative research methodologies. Migrating the phenomenological insights into per National scales for measuring this on a larger scale is currently being developed by Allan KøAster in collaboration with quantitatively orientated grief researchers.

14 ( ) Thomas Fuchs has argued that depressive disorders often involve temporal and inter subjective desynchronization. Since we find a similar phenomenon in cases of grief, it may be worth conducting a comparative study of grief and depression to determine whether there are key differences in the kind of desynchronization expert Inced by persons in the two groups.

Anthony Vincent Fernandez Department of Philosophy, University of South Florida Allan KøAster Department of Communication and Psychology, Aalborg University The Phenomenological Approach The Phenomenological Approach Dermot Moran The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Aug 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Phenomenology as an approach emerges with the work of Edmund Husserl and was de eloped in original ways by Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, Maurice Merleau-Monty, Alfred Schulz, and others, to become one of the major philosophical movements of the twentieth century. Phenomenology begins from the recognition that conscious life is in tentional, that is, that all conscious awareness is directed at something, and that there is a complex correlation between the subjective act and the object apprehended, such that the object is said to be “constituted” by the subject. In order to lay bare this intentional constitution, phenomenologists apply a procedure of bracketing or phenomenological re Auction that strips away presuppositions embedded in the natural attitude. Phenomenolo gy has wide application not just in philosophy but in psychology and psychiatry. In recent years, phenomenology’s stress on the embodied character of life in the context of a lifeworld has had a major impact on cognitive science.

Keywords: phenomenology, intentionality, subjectivity, first-person, embodiment, life-world # Introduction: Phenomenology as the Science of # Subjectivity PHENOMENOLOGY, broadly speaking, involves the careful, unprejudiced description of conscious, lived experiences (Husserl’s Erlebnisse ), precisely according to the manner that they are experienced, without the imposition of external explanatory frameworks, whether these be drawn from the natural or social sciences, from religion, or even from common sense or ordinary language use. In this sense, phenomenology seeks to remain true to what conscious experience—understood in the widest possible sense—reveals to the disciplined observer. Phenomenology, then, must be loyal to the way our experiences are actually given to us (we shall come back to the problem of the right kind of language for describing experiences). Phenomenology aims to recuperate our responses to expert The Phenomenological Approach Once and, in particular, to resist reductionist, scientistic efforts to displace the richness of experience with a narrower, usually more naturalistic account of experience.

The enduring appeal of phenomenology is that it respects the importance and centrality of the first-person point of view. Phenomenology is, as Husserl put it, a science of subject tivity, but it is also a science of subjectivity embodied, embedded, and involved in the in tersubjective constitution of objectivity. Phenomenology continues to attract interest be cause of its strong defense of the ineliminability of subjectivity and its detailed analyses of the structures of conscious life and of the “life-world,” the ordinary, everyday, pre-sci entific world that we inhabit. Phenomenologists can begin from their own experience, but they are open to understanding other people’s experiences, as they are experienced (ex maples can be found in real life, in literature, or, simply, through the process of imagine Dive variation, a procedure that Husserl himself practiced). In other words, close Batten son must be paid to the subject’s own account of their experiences, emotions, and how they form their general sense of matters that affect them.

(p. 206) The Phenomenological Approach: “Back to # the Things Themselves”

Phenomenology as a movement is usually said to have begun with Husserl’s Logical In vestigations, although it has an earlier inauguration in the descriptive psy chology of Franz Brentano, who was Husserl’s mentor for a period in Vi Anna. Through Husserl’s students and followers, it developed into a major philosophical movement in Europe (especially Germany and France) and subsequently in the United States and internationally. The main figures (Husserl, Schemer, Heidegger, Schulz, Sartre, Merleau-Monty) developed phenomenology in different directions and dissociative identity disorder not necessarily agree on the central tenets of the approach. Phenomenology, then, should be understood as a general approach rather than a strict method. Different phenomenolo Fists, of course, have developed different approaches. Nevertheless, there are certain commonalities which can be observed as broadly characterizing the phenomenological approach. It is best to think of phenomenology not as a set of specific philosophical com Fitments but rather a disciplined approach that wishes to remain open to the role of sub jectivity in the constitution of various forms of objectivity.

Husserl’s original slogan was: “Back to the Things Themselves [ Zu den Sateen selbst ]” (Husserl 2001: 168). And this phrase soon became the catch-cry of the phenom nological movement. Husserl means that phenomenology should avoid metaphysical spec Elation or other forms of theorizing, and, making use of description rather than causal ex placation, attempt to gain insight into the essences of all kinds of phenomena. Husserl’s Freiburg colleague and former assistant, Martin Heidegger, in Being and Time, empha sized the specifically methodological dimension of phenomenology: The Phenomenological Approach The expression “phenomenology” signifies primarily a methodological conception.

This expression does not characterize the what of the objects of philosophical re search as subject-matter, but rather the how of that research.

(Heidegger 1962: 50)

Heidegger wants to develop phenomenology as a way of making phenomena manifest. In Being and Time, Heidegger defines phenomenology as “to let that which shows itself be seen from itself in the very way in which it shows itself from itself” ( Heidegger 1962: 58). This formulation is close to that found in Husserl’s Crisis of European Sciences: “to take the conscious life, completely without prejudice, just as what it quite immediately gives it self, as itself, to be” (Husserl 1970: 233). In both Husserl and Heidegger, then, phenom nology aims at manifestation. At the same time, there is a strong injunction not to tamper with this disclosure or revelation but rather to allow it to manifest itself in its own ecu liar way. Human subjects are, as Robert Sokolowski puts it, agents of disclosure, “agents of truth”.

There is an essential double-sidedness—often called “correlation” to phenomenological intuition. There is, on the one hand, the object meant or intended and, on the other hand, the act of meaning or intending it. Traditional philosophy has tended to emphasize one or the other side of this correlation (i.e. objectivist or subjectivist) and has rarely sought to give credit to the essential subject–object relation and the manner in which experience vacillates backwards and forwards between an object-focus and a subject-focus. Phenom Oenology (p. 207) argues that the objective view—what Merleau-Monty calls, in his 1945 Phenomenology of Perception, “the view from nowhere [ la vue de Tulle part ]” —is achieved only by abstracting from the original first-person stance with which humans engage with the world.

Phenomenology, then, offers an important corrective, analyzing and describing the strum Cure of consciousness, intentionality, and embodied being-in-the-world in a way which does not lose sight of the first-person perspective, that is, subjectivity both singular and plural (Husserl speaks of the “we-world [ Wir-Welt ]”). For phenomenology, human beings are embodied, intentional meaning-makers, acting and suffering in a surrounding world (the “life-world”), and their subjective slant on matters is not just an annoying inconve niece for the objectivist sciences. Rather, it has to be acknowledged as the very medium of human existence and as the necessary condition for objectivity to be possible. This means phenomenology essentially involves understanding intentionality, the fact that all our lived experiences are about something, have some kind of significance, which is linked to a whole nexus or web of motivations and other intentional implications.

The Phenomenological Approach # Phenomenology as Intentional Description of # Meaningful Existence Phenomenology essentially is intentional description, that is, it aims to describe all kinds of objects in terms of their correlation with subjectivity. Furthermore, phenomenology maintains that intentionality is all-pervasive; all aspects of life involve a coming together of subjective attitude and objective meaning. Besides the intentionality of cognitive states (such as believing, knowing), the intentional structures of perceptions, feelings, moods and emotions, acts of willing and deciding, as well as all kinds of habitual practices, are primary topics of exploration for phenomenologists.

Phenomenology may be characterized initially, very broadly, as a practice of attending to matters that manifest themselves to us (“phenomena” in the widest sense of the word). For Husserl, this meant understanding precisely the essential nature of perception, mem ory, imagination, temporal consciousness, and other forms of “calling to mind [ Vergegen wärtigung ],” and how these different conscious modalities interweave seamlessly in the stream of consciousness. What is the nature of perception? How are objects experienced in perception? What is their “mode of givenness”? How does perception become altered into a memory or a fantasy? These are typical phenomenological questions. Traditionally, phenomenologists have attempted to describe the essential features of conscious cogni Dive life, with specific studies of perception, memory, imagination, willing (PfäOder 1967), valuing, and judging, but phenom nologists have also sought to describe Effective life, feelings, emotions, moods, existential concerns, and various dimensions of lived embody Bent, and, more generally, “being-in-the-world” (Heidegger’s In-der-Welt- San, Heidegger 1962; and Merleau-Monty’s être-au-mode, Merleau-Monty 2012).

Phenomenological insights (which Husserl called “intuitions [ Anschauungen ]”) are under stood to be insights into the essential natures of matters (what Husserl called “essential (p. 208) seeing [ Wesensschau ]”) that can be read off the phenomena by the trained ob server. This intuitionist emphasis has been dismissed as a form of unreliable introspection by its critics, but phenomenologists insist that the universal structure al features of the experience can be uncovered by remaining attentive to the experience as it unfolds or as it is captured in unprejudiced reflection.

Phenomenology is a discipline, therefore, that tries to be extremely sensitive to the Kari ties of ways in which meaning presents itself to us as living, conscious, embodied sub Sects embedded in a shared environment, or “life-world [ Lebenswelt ]”. For phenomenology, this meaning is not necessarily tied to language and for this reason phe nomenologists emphasize the intrinsic meaning involved in pre-linguistic embodied action and perception, in emotional states, moods, and in one’s overall embodiment (right down to one’s posture, see Straps 1966) and intersubjective relations with others, mediated through empathy.

The Phenomenological Approach Husserl insisted that phenomenology had to be “presuppositionless”: one should not pre suppose the results of the sciences or even the judgments of common sense. A large part of Husserl’s concern is to emphasize the complexity of even simple acts of seeing. There is always, for instance, a combination of present and absent moments, to see the front side is at the same time to have an empty intending apprehension of the rear side of an object in the form of a determinable indeterminacy. It is important not to think that visual perception first and foremost involves “visual sensations,” “stimuli,” and so on (standard ways of describing experience found in philosophy and psychology since Locke). These descriptions are not faithful descriptions of experience, but rather they involve reference to putative theoretical entities (“sense data,” “qualia,” “stimuli,” and so on). First and foremost, one sees physical, spatial entities in the world already endowed with sense, a flowering apple tree in the garden (Husserl 2014: 180); one certainly does not see sense data, mere patches of green, or some other kind of postulated intermediate entity. Fur thermore, as Heidegger emphasizes, what one sees is constrained by one’s background assumptions and by the overall context of the “environment [ Umwelt ]” and “life-world [Lebenswelt ]”). A craftsperson can identify the appropriate tools for a particular task and immediately sees what needs to be done. The gardener identifies some plants as flowers and others as weeds, not based on botanical classification but based on their usefulness and appropriateness in the context of gardening (itself a cultural and historically inflect ed practice). This is what Heidegger means when he says we first encounter objects in a practical way as “ready-to-hand [ zuhanden ]” rather than merely as “present-at-hand [vorhanden ],” objects merely theoretically apprehended, horn of their context of useful Bess.

Martin Heidegger’s Being and Time is regarded as one of the most creative and original works of philosophy of the twentieth century. Central to Heidegger’s achievement in this work is his radical way of approaching human existence, which both makes the nature of human existence unfamiliar and startling (described in entirely novel terms) and at the same time recognizes the human being’s inescapable hunger for familiarity, its anchoring in the routines of the everyday, its self-recognition in terms of the quotidian. Part of Heidegger’s originality lies in the way that he emphasizes the “historicality” of human ex istence. It is not just that all humans live in history and have a history but that their oriel Cation to existence is such as to be intrinsically historical. Being historical is an a prior condition of being human. Human existence then has to be understood in terms of its overall temporal dimensions # (p. 209) The Phenomenological Reduction: Break # ing with the Natural Attitude Many phenomenologists follow Husserl in insisting that phenomenological description can only be practiced within the performance of the phenomenological reduction. Follow ing the straightforward descriptive psychology of the Logical Investigations, around 1905, Husserl realized that he needed to apply a methodological break (which he called epoché, The Phenomenological Approach borrowing from the Greek Skeptics) with the pre-philosophical “natural” attitude in order to contemplate how meanings and significance are constituted and come to assume the “natural” character that they present to us in ordinary experience. In his Ideas I, for in stance, Husserl speaks of epoché as rigorous “exclusion [ Ausschaltung ]” and an “absten son [Enthaltung ]” from employing the methods or propositions of the philosophical trad son (Husserl 2014: 52). The epoché and the associated “phenomenological reductions” are meant to allow the nature of the experiences to become manifest without distortion and to lead back (Latin: re-ducere ) to the apprehension of the essential (“eidetic”) strum Cures, contents, and objects and how they interconnect with other forms of conscious Bess. To filter out distortions produced by our everyday, straightforward assumptions and presuppositions (which need not be scientific assumptions, but could include religious be Fiefs, cultural values, and so on), Husserl proposes a process of suspension or bracketing (epoché ) and a set of phenomenological and transcendental “reductions” as essential to the phenomenological method.

Heidegger, however, does not make explicit use of Husserl’s phenomenological reduction, whereas Husserl thought it as essential to the point of claiming that anyone who misun derstood the importance of the reduction could not be doing phenomenology. Merleau- Monty accepted a modified version of the phenomenological reduction. He famously said that the lesson of Husserl’s reduction was that it could not be carried out to completion because it ran up against the indissoluble life-world—this “rupture can teach us nothing but the unmotivated springing forth of the world” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: xxvii).

The Natural and the Transcendental Attitudes One of phenomenology’s greatest and most useful discoveries is that of “the natural Patti Dude [ die natürliche Einstellung ]”—a term Husserl uses from at least as early as 1906–07 but which emerges in print in Ideas I (Husserl 2014: 48). Because phenomenology focuses on the manner of experiencing, it necessarily involves interrupting natural, straightfor ward experiencing (as carried out in what Husserl calls “the natural attitude”). According to Husserl, in our everyday practices and routines, we are in a certain attitude (“the nat Aral attitude”) toward things and toward the world, and somehow this is a state of selfforgetfulness. The world presents itself as simply there, given, available to us.

In his mature works, Husserl articulates in some detail the meaning of mundane life in the “natural attitude,” which involves all aspects of human engagement with others and with (p. 210) the world as a whole, the very experience of “being-in-theworld” that Heidegger later explicitly thematizes in Being and Time. Disrupting the nature al attitude and undermining its hold on us will be central to Husserl’s practice of the phe nomenological method. By applying a deliberate “exclusion,” “suspension,” or “bracket ing” (epoché ) of our straightforward commitments, phenomenology hopes to uncover the necessary structures that govern the essence of experiences as such, including the partic Alar character they have in the natural mode of experiencing. This led Husserl in particu The Phenomenological Approach lar to adopt a transcendental stance, which sees consciousness as somehow antecedent to the world, and strongly to oppose all forms of naturalism.

Subjectivity as Embodied, Embedded, and En # worded As Husserl’s phenomenology developed, he increasingly emphasized that we are incur ate, that is to say, embodied, situated, finite human beings, already in the world and for whom the world has a given, taken-for-granted, “natural” status. Husserl himself speaks of the “phenomenology of embodiment [ Phänomenologie der Leiblichkeit ].” Similarly, he attended to the enworlded nature of our experience. Much of Husserl’s puzzlement came from trying to figure out how it is that the lived world comes to have this taken-for-grant Redness, self-givenness, and obviousness in the natural attitude. Of course, this situated Bess and locatedness went on to become the theme of “ In-der-Welt-Rein ” in Heidegger or “être-au-mode ” in Merleau-Monty.

Phenomenology puts special focus on identifying the a prior frameworks involved in the stream of a coherent, unified conscious life (not just spatiality and temporality, as in the Kantian tradition, but also the a prior structures of human, embodied, social being-in-theworld). Initially phenomenologists, moreover, concentrated primarily on individual conscious life, but they (Husserl, Schemer, Stein) soon explored the apprehension of others, and the constitution of communal, social, and cultural life, in deed the historical dimension of human existence. Classic phenomenology—primarily the work of Husserl, Heidegger, Max Schemer, Edith Stein, Alfred Schulz, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Maurice Merleau-Monty—proposed a very broad program of research that included essential analyses of all the central aspects of human existence: intentionality, conscious Bess, perception, embodiment, the “horizontal” nature of experiences, the dimensions of lived temporality, the experience of one’s self, the experience of others in “empathy [ Ein fühlung ]”, the experience of alterity, more generally, and intercorporeality, as well as in the understanding of social relations, intersubjectivity, historic ty, socialite, and the whole vague but real experience of “worldhood” (i.e. belonging to an open-ended “life-world” as the ultimate horizon of all experience). Indeed, the classical phenomenological tradition is still a rich source of analyses of phenomena such as magi nation, memory, emotions, moods, liminal experiences, the complex character of embody Bent or incarnation (with its essential finitude), the experience of lived temporality and historicality, as well as humans’ experience of tools, artworks, and the transformation of life in the modern technological world. More recently, phenomenolo Fists have also attended to (p. 211) issues of gender following the explorations of Simone de Beauvoir and Maurice Merleau-Monty and to the construe son of social identity (including the sense of belonging to a “group” or larger collective whole).

The Phenomenological Approach Husserl, for instance, claims (and here he strongly influenced Merleau-Monty) that per caption is a multimodal achievement, an intertwining of various sense modalities (sight, touch) and of bodily proprioceptive movements (called “kinaestheses” in the psychology cal terminology of the time) such as eye movements, hand movements, movements of the body (to get nearer, get a better grip, look more closely), involving looking over the ob Sect, pointing, grasping, moving around the object, and so on. The body is in the world as the “heart is in the organism,” Merleau-Monty declares ( Merleau-Monty 2012: 209). It is our embodied perception that brings the visible and tangible world alive and Merleau- Monty in particular shows the entanglement or “chiasme” that is constantly at work be tween the separate senses (e.g. touch and sight), as well as between body and world. Moreover, disorders of the embodied relation to the world involve a significant modification of the way the world appears. There is a very fine attunement between lived body and world and it is upset in pathological cases, like the case of the brain-damaged former soldier, Schneider, discussed by Merleau-Monty (Merleau-Monty 2012: 105–140). Merleau-Monty’s discussions have inspired a whole phenomenology of embodiment that recognizes the complex manner in which humans are inserted through their “lived,” animate bodies into the environing world.

Phenomenology as Interpretive and Hermeneu # tidal Martin Heidegger, especially in Being and Time, radicalized Husserl’s intentionality to offer a description of human existence ( Casein ) as essentially transcend ing itself toward the world and developed the conception that human beings can live rather anonymously and “inauthentically” as “the one [ das Man ],” simply following the crowd and doing as others do. But humans can also, through the deep, highly individualize ing, existential experience of anxiety ( Angst ), face up to their own intrinsic finitude and mortality and can come face to face with their authentic singularity and freedom to project themselves into a future that they deliberately choose.

Heidegger’s introduction of hermeneutics (i.e. the theory of interpretation) into phenom nology was a way of neutralizing or at least exposing the operation of prejudice in our un derstanding. Prejudices for him cannot be eliminated, but at least they can be made transparent, acknowledged, and our corresponding insights put in correlation with these pre-judgments so that our understanding progressed in a “circular” manner (the hermeneutic circle), going backwards and forwards between what is understood and the manner in which it is understood. Heidegger—inspired by Wilhelm Dilthey—combined hermeneutics, the art of interpretative understanding, with phenomenology. Heidegger argued—against Husserl—that pure, unprejudiced description is impossible, since all un derstanding takes place with the horizon of presuppositions that are essential for the un derstanding to take place. At best, unrecognized presuppositions or “pre-judgments [Vorurteilen ]” can be made manifest but they (p. 212) can never be entirely dispensed with. Furthermore, language is essential to understanding and communication, and lan The Phenomenological Approach gauge always has a particular slant or leaning. Both Heidegger and his student Hans- Reorg Gadamer emphasize the centrality of the human capacity for “linguisticality [Sprachlichkeit ].” As Gadamer asserts in his 1960 Truth and Method, “language is the medium of the hermeneutic experience,” that is, language is the medium in which under standing is realized (Gadamer 1989: 384). Heidegger’s hermeneutical phenomenology fo cuties more on uncovering the essential “ existential ” framework governing what is pregiven and assumed in human existence’s ( Casein ’s) practical engagement with the world of interests and “in-order-to’s.” For Heidegger, humans are already embedded (“ Dimmer scion da ”) in a pre-formed, and largely intuitively apprehended, historical and cultural world. Moreover, they are oriented primarily to the future, and the past is always implicit ly interpreted in terms of this future project.

Gadamer’s own hermeneutics is heavily indebted to phenomenology. He sees his hermeneutics as making manifest or displaying “the matters themselves [ die Sateen self st],” shedding light on the essence of these matters in what he calls an “illumination of essence [ Wesenserhellung ].” In fact, hermeneutics, for Gadamer, is the project of self-un derstanding and understanding others, and as such it can be said to develop a phenom nology of the very process of understanding ( Verstehen ).

Existential Phenomenology Phenomenology came to France in the 1930s, primarily through Emmanuel Levinas, Jean- Paul Sartre, and Maurice Merleau-Monty. Phenomenology now takes on an existential dimension and issues concerning human xis Fence, the experience of freedom, of anxiety, of alienation, the expectation of one’s own death, and one’s concernful dealings with others, now come to the fore. Sartre and Mer lo-Monty emphasized human embodiment, facticity, being in a situation, the experience of freedom and the experience of being forced to choose in the absence of any objective norms governing the choice. Thus, for example, Sartre, in his 1938 novel Nausea describes the experience of vertigo (e.g. standing on a cliff ledge) as precisely the sense of anxiety that overcomes one when one realizes that one’s freedom is entirely in one’s own hands. The vertigo is not the recognition of the possibility of falling but of the experienced freedom of taking responsibility for the decision not to jump.

Merleau-Monty considered Husserl’s emphasis on the epoché and phenomenological re Auction to be both crucial but problematic. As we saw earlier, Merleau-Monty denies the possibility of a complete reduction. One can never completely detach oneself from the life-world in which we are embodied and embedded. For Merleau-Monty, the practice of phenomenological seeing is meant to disrupt the everyday. In his Phenomenology of Per caption, he writes: “true philosophy entails learning to see the world anew” ( Merleau- Monty 2012: xxxv). Philosophy will shed light on the “birth of being” for us. Phenomenolo gy aims at “disclosure of the world [ révéCation du mode ]” (Merleau-Monty 2012: xxvii); its task is to reveal the mystery of the world.

The Phenomenological Approach Phenomenological description and taking seriously the obvious experiential evidence that people’s emotions, feelings, and moods are intentional (i.e. are about something and are obviously meaningful in some manner) was a very important insight for psychologists and (p. 213) psychiatrists especially in the 1920s. The early phenomenologists, especially Max Schemer and Edith Stein, discussed feelings and emotions. Right at the heart of this ap roach is that people’s moods and traumas are modalities of being-in-the-world. These ex periences are lived deeply in the body, in a person’s self-experience and in their expert Once with others. In this regard, Heidegger has made significant contributions with his analyses of “fundamental moods [ Grundstimmungen ],” “disposition/state of mind/attune Bent [ Befindlichkeit ],” and the experience of “thrownness [ Geworfenheit ],” finding one self always thrown into a situation. Heidegger is famous for locating authentic self-under standing in a deep anxiety which comes over each human existence at some point. Anti ety is not like fear, a relationship to something in particular, but has as its object one’s whole being-in-the-world. One’s whole being is experienced as groundless and unsupport ed. Sartre develops this with his account of vertigo—where one experiences one’s own absolute freedom. Vertigo is not so much the fear of falling as the fear of jumping. One’s inner freedom is limitless and in this sense truly terrifying, opening up before one like a yawning chasm.

The Application of Phenomenology It is not difficult to see the benefits of phenomenological description for medical jag noses, for example, the correct recognition of symptoms, and so on. One can also see that literature is a vast repository of such photo-phenomenological description and diam biguation, for example, consider the explorations of jealousy, possessiveness, envy, and so on, in Shakespeare. Of course, the ability to make fine discrimination (as in the case of the professional wine-taster) has to be matched with an equal ability to translate these discrimination into appropriately fine-grained linguistic communication. Literary de Ascription has the phenomenological character of being a description from the subjective point of view but of course it has not been methodologically refined and distilled through the techniques of disengagement and bracketing that phenomenology brings to bear. Pre sumably, literary descriptions do aim at a universality and hence have the claim to eidetic character that phenomenology also seeks. Husserl himself recognized this problem but dissociative identity disorder not address it centrally, at least until some of his later writings, for instance his essay “On the Origin of Geometry” where he accords to written language an enormously important role in fixing the meanings of ideal objectivities such as occur in mathematics so that they can be accessed as the same over and over again. For Heideg ger, however, the issue of language became inescapable and marked a major turning in his conception of phenomenology and its possibilities. Subsequent phenomenology has had to grapple with the complexity of the relationship between language and experience in ways that have frequently challenged many of Husserl’s assumptions. This is the case with Jacques Derrida, for instance, insofar as his work is motivated by phenomenology The Phenomenological Approach and continues to work within the phenomenological epoché, as he himself has attested.

Initially, when it originally emerged in Husserl and Schemer, interest in phenomenology was more or less confined to academic philosophy. But it was soon taken up and adapted by other disciplines in the social and human sciences, for example, psychology, psychic try, psychoanalysis, sociology, literary theory, art criticism, cultural studies, religious stud ies, and more recently, film theory, gender and identity studies, and studies concerned with human (p. 214) embodiment and intersubjectivity. Both as a strict method and, more generally, as a theoretical approach, phenomenology is now well established not only within theoretical philosophy, but also in various forms of sociology, psychology, psychiatry and psychotherapy, and, more recently, as a method of qualitative analysis in the social and health sciences. Phenomenology continues to provide a rich resource of procedures and perspectives for illuminating human experiences.

Introduction by P. Simmons. London: Rutledge.

Butler J.. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. London: Rout ledge.

Derrida J.. Voice and Phenomenon. Introduction to the Problem of the Sign in Husserl’s Phenomenology, trans. L. Lawlor. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Dreyfus H. L.. Being-In-the-World. A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time, Division I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Gadamer H.-G.. Truth and Method, trans. J. Weinsheimer and D. G. Marshall. 2nd rev edn. London: Heed & Ward.

Gendlin E.. Focusing. 2nd rev edn. New York: Bantam Books.

Giorgi A.. Psychology as a Human Science: A Phenomenologically Based Approach. New York: Harper & Row.

Giorgi A.. The Descriptive Phenomenological Method in Psychology: A Modified Husserlian Approach. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

Gurwitsch A.. The Field of Consciousness. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

Husserl E.. Cartesian Meditations, trans. D. Cairns. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff.

The Phenomenological Approach Heidegger M.. Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson. New York: Harper and Row.

Heidegger M.. The Question Concerning Technology and Other essays, trans. W. Levitt. New York: Garland Publishing.

Heidegger M.. Zollikon Seminars: Protocols–Conversations–Letters, ed. Medard Boss, trans. F. Mar and R. Assay. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Husserl E.. The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy, trans. D. Carr. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Husserl E.. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, Second Book, trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer. Collected Works third. Dor Brecht: Kluwer.

Husserl E.. Logical Investigations, 2 vols, trans. J. N. Finlay. Edited with a New Introduction by Dermot Moran and New Preface by Michael Dummett. London and New York: Rutledge.

Husserl E.. Ideas for a Pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book. General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, trans. D. O. Dahlstrom. Ind anapolis: Hackett.

(p. 215) Landgrebe L.. “The World as a Phenomenological Problem.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 1: 38–58.

Merleau-Monty M.. The Visible and the Invisible, trans. A. Lings. Evanston: North western University Press.

Merleau-Monty M.. The Phenomenology of Perception, trans. D. A. Lades. London: Rutledge.

Moran D.. Introduction to Phenomenology. London and New York: Rutledge.

PfäOder A.. Phenomenology of Willing and Other Phaenomenologica, trans. H. Spiegelberg. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Sartre J.-P.. Imagination. A Psychological Critique, trans. F. Williams. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Sartre J.-P.. Nausea, trans. R. Baldick. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Sartre J.-P.. Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions, trans. P. Maigret. London: Methuen.

Sartre J.-P.. Being and Nothingness. An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology, trans. H. Barnes. London: Rutledge.

The Phenomenological Approach Schemer M.. Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values. A New Attempt Toward a Foundation of an Ethical Personalism, trans. M. S. Rings and R. L. Funk. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schemer M.. The Nature of Sympathy, trans. P. Heath. Rev edn with New Introduce son by G. McAleer. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. Schulz A.. The Phenomenology of the Social World, trans. G. Walsh and F. Lehnert. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schulz A. and Luckmann T.. The Structures of the Life-World. Vol. 1, trans. R. M. Caner, and H. T. Engelhardt Jr. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schulz A. and Luckmann T.. The Structures of the Life-World. Vol. 2, trans. R. M. Caner and D. J. Parent. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Searle J. R.. “The Limits of Phenomenology.” In Mark A. Wrathall and Jeff Malpas (eating disorders.), Heidegger, Coping, and Cognitive Science: Essays in Honor of Hubert L. Dreyfus, Vol. 2, pp. 71–92. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Searle J. R.. “The Phenomenological Illusion.” In M. E. Richer and J. C. Mark (eating disorders.), Experience and Analysis. Erfahrung und Analyze, 317–336. Vienna: ÖBV&HPT Ver lag, 2005. Smith J. A., Flowers, P., and Larking, M.. Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis: Theory Method and Research. London: Sage. Sokolowski R.. Phenomenology of the Human Person. New York: Cambridge Uni varsity Press. Stein E.. On the Problem of Empathy, trans. W. Stein. Collected Works of Edith Stein Vol. 3. Washington, DC: ICS Publications. Stein E.. Philosophy of Psychology and the Humanities. Washington, DC: ICS Public cations. Straps E. W. (ed.). Phenomenology: Pure and Applied. Pittsburgh: Duquesne Uni varsity Press. Straps E. W.. Phenomenological Psychology, trans. E. Eng. New York: Basic Books. Vendrell Terran I.. “The Emotions in Early Phenomenology.” Studio Phaenomenol Mica 15: 349–374. Young I. M.. On Female Body Experience: “Throwing Like a Girl” and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Dermot Moran The Phenomenological Approach Schemer M.. Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values. A New Attempt Toward a Foundation of an Ethical Personalism, trans. M. S. Rings and R. L. Funk. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schemer M.. The Nature of Sympathy, trans. P. Heath. Rev edn with New Introduce son by G. McAleer. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. Schulz A.. The Phenomenology of the Social World, trans. G. Walsh and F. Lehnert. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schulz A. and Luckmann T.. The Structures of the Life-World. Vol. 1, trans. R. M. Caner, and H. T. Engelhardt Jr. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Schulz A. and Luckmann T.. The Structures of the Life-World. Vol. 2, trans. R. M. Caner and D. J. Parent. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Searle J. R.. “The Limits of Phenomenology.” In Mark A. Wrathall and Jeff Malpas (eating disorders.), Heidegger, Coping, and Cognitive Science: Essays in Honor of Hubert L. Dreyfus, Vol. 2, pp. 71–92. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Searle J. R.. “The Phenomenological Illusion.” In M. E. Richer and J. C. Mark (eating disorders.), Experience and Analysis. Erfahrung und Analyze, 317–336. Vienna: ÖBV&HPT Ver lag, 2005. Smith J. A., Flowers, P., and Larking, M.. Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis: Theory Method and Research. London: Sage. Sokolowski R.. Phenomenology of the Human Person. New York: Cambridge Uni varsity Press. Stein E.. On the Problem of Empathy, trans. W. Stein. Collected Works of Edith Stein Vol. 3. Washington, DC: ICS Publications. Stein E.. Philosophy of Psychology and the Humanities. Washington, DC: ICS Public cations. Straps E. W. (ed.). Phenomenology: Pure and Applied. Pittsburgh: Duquesne Uni varsity Press. Straps E. W.. Phenomenological Psychology, trans. E. Eng. New York: Basic Books. Vendrell Terran I.. “The Emotions in Early Phenomenology.” Studio Phaenomenol Mica 15: 349–374. Young I. M.. On Female Body Experience: “Throwing Like a Girl” and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Dermot Moran The Phenomenological Approach Dermot Moran is professor of philosophy at Boston College and president of the In ternational Federation of Philosophical Studies/Fédération Internationale des So ciétés de Philosophic (FISP). His publications include: The Philosophy of John Scotchs Eriugena: A Study of Idealism in the Middle Ages, Introduction to Phenom nology, Edmund Husserl: Founder of Phenomenology, and Husserl’s Crisis of the European Sciences: An Introduction. He is founding editor of The International Journal of Philosophical Studies and co-editor of the book series Contributions to Phenomenology (Stringer).

The Phenomenological Approach Dermot Moran is professor of philosophy at Boston College and president of the In ternational Federation of Philosophical Studies/Fédération Internationale des So ciétés de Philosophic (FISP). His publications include: The Philosophy of John Scotchs Eriugena: A Study of Idealism in the Middle Ages, Introduction to Phenom nology, Edmund Husserl: Founder of Phenomenology, and Husserl’s Crisis of the European Sciences: An Introduction. He is founding editor of The International Journal of Philosophical Studies and co-editor of the book series Contributions to Phenomenology (Stringer).

Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phenomenology Dorothée Legrand The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Clinical phenomenology weaves descriptive, structural, and transcendental threads. At the descriptive level, phenomenology does not end but starts with the confrontation to that which does not immediately appear in consciousness; an analysis is already required here, which brackets the dichotomy between normal and pathological, to consider the meaning of being human. Structurally, clinical phenomenology may perform an anthropo logical analysis aiming at characterizing the organization of any individual life; or it may seek to assume an ontological scope to determine the human openness to Being prevail ing before intentionality cuts the subject apart from objects. A transcendental analysis may consider that the foundation of being-human is rooted in an anonymous, subjective source of experience, to which one’s receptive openness would be impaired in psy chopathology. In clinical phenomenology, one ought to consider how these different filo sophical orientations may impact the encounter between a patient and a clinician.

Keywords: singularity, experience, evidence, intentionality, subjectivity, impersonal, transcendental, encounter # Philosophy Becoming Clinical 1 CLINICAL phenomenologists tirelessly hold a reflective stance on their practice, aiming to determine its foundations and delimit its scope. In itself, the reiteration of this effort suggests a resistance of clinical practice to comply with a given philosophical system, and a resistance of philosophy to blend into a given clinical practice. Phenomenology con fronts philosophy and clinical practice with a process aiming at a uniformity that con scantly fails and thus calls for ceaselessly rethinking their articulation as a never achieved process. Prioritizing philosophical loyalty assumes that phenomenology, even if clinical, can in no way give up its philosophical exigency, and cannot accept any compromise that would use the excuse of clinical practice to offload heavy philosophical constraints (Boss 1980: 98). In this case, clinical practice is philosophical. However, strictly speaking, Blini cal practice is not philosophical if the clinician, not the philosopher, aims at turning the Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology knowledge of the condition of Being-Human into the acknowledgment of a human being sin gularly. If it is thus recognized that “the direction of questioning” ( Blankenburg 2012: 2 30) orients differently the investigation depending on whether it is philosophical or Blini 3 cal, then the guide favored by the clinician will be clinical fecundity; the ethics of clinical practice is to be first and always guided (p. 217) by the clinical encounter, by the hospital ty given to the other, even at the cost of being unfaithful to the philosophical foundation of this practice. But would’t such infidelity call for a philosophical revision? Do we not then enter a dialectical movement between a philosophical moment of one’s practice and a clinical one? And after such a circulation, would’t it be the case that the philosophical and clinical directions of questioning would lose their specificities by merging into one undifferentiated practice?

Here, we will not try to determine whether a clinical practice is or is not philosophical—as if a definitive criterion could be set; instead we will insist on the ongoing dynamics that tie together philosophy and clinical practice, and propose that philosophy becomes clinical when, “certainly without denying the essential ideas that probably first show themselves away from the real, there would be a necessity to come closer to the facts where these ideas are, at first, unrecognizable, but where they are clarified and justified by all the concreteness of human suffering” ( Levinas 1984: 408; italics modified). This sentence alone, as it weaves, without confusing them, philosophical and clinical orient sons, allows us to glimpse the dynamics of their unstable articulation. Moreover, it ap pears here that no choice needs to be made between one’s commitment to philosophy and one’s engagement into clinical practice: philosophical fidelity is justified by clinical fecund City. Conceived of as such, the most fruitful philosophic-clinical joints do not necessarily allow or compel us to decide between the fiercest philosophical oppositions. In particular, phenomenology is inherently heterogeneous, and it is by avoiding the exclusion of a given philosophical orientation, that is, it is “in virtue of” the articulation of different orientations that a “concept is set in motion,” and may become clinical ( Blankenburg 2012: 33, 171).

Braiding Phenomenological Analysis Given the complexity of a practice at once philosophical and clinical, the efforts made to determine a field proper to clinical phenomenology have been unceasing. Notably, a div ion of labor haunts this domain, according to whether it aims at describing experiential contents, the structure of these experiences, and/or the transcendental constitution of these experiences. This methodological division is supported by the distinction between, on the one hand, that which would be directly accessible as immediate data of conscious Bess and, on the other hand, that which would not be so accessible, and would thus re quire an analysis.

Emphasizing such division of labor, Karl Jasper inaugurated the introduction of phenom Oenology in clinical practice by stating that “[i]n phenomenology we scrutinize a number of qualities or states and the understanding that accompanies this has a static quality” ( Jasper Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology 1997: 27; emphasis in the original). Thus, phenomenology leaves to others to understand and explain “the emergence of one psychic phenomenon from another” ( Jasper 1997: 25). Against such a restriction of the phenomenological scope, it will be assumed here that it is the different descriptive, structural, and transcendental threads that, together, weave (p. 218) clinical phenomenology. Triple in such a way, phenomenology is nonethe less not omnipotent since, rigorously, one cannot presuppose the possibility of a total Alar ification of the phenomenon under investigation, even via the descriptions of finely de tailed contents of consciousness, complex experiential structures, and universally power ful transcendental processes. Jasper himself argues that our direct access to psychic states is only superficial, as if we would thereby only touch “the foam on the sea’s sur face” ( Jasper 1997: 10). To explain psychic depths themselves would require relying up on “extra-conscious mechanisms, unconscious events” which are “never actually expert Inced” and thus remain inaccessible even to the most advanced description ( Jasper 1997: 10–11). For Jasper, this is where phenomenology ends; however, this is where it begins for Heidegger.

Phenomenology, Heidegger writes, is a method that, as such, is “directly opposed to the naïveté of a haphazard, ‘immediate’, and unreflective ‘beholding’ ”; phenomenological analysis aims at “something that proximally and for the most part does not show itself at all... something that lies hidden ” (Heidegger 2001: 61; emphasis in the original). As phenomenological, analysis is conceived of variously, depending on theoretical positions that otherwise tear apart members of the phenomenological corpus. Nonetheless, practi ally, it carries at least one consensus: we could not practice clinical phenomenology if we were not making ourselves capable “of welcoming and accepting impartially, without re striation and without being deformed by our own theoretical and intellectual prejudices or by personal and emotional censures, what we always and invariably obtain from our analysands by listening to them and observing them” ( Boss 1980: 152). Under the motto “phenomenology,” one here aspires to “a description as freed from theory as possible” ( Blankenburg 2012: 22). Already, this descriptive approach requires to “return to the thing itself”: one must “return” below one’s “sedimented attainment,” and have the “rigor,” the “scientific courage” to renounce them ( Maldiney 1986: 11).

Armed with such method, phenomenological clinical practice does not restrict its scope to 4 pathology. Rather, it occurs before any attribution of normality or abnormality, to target 5 what constitutes both. Although this can be taken neither as its birth certificate, nor as its specificity, clinical phenomenology positions itself against any clinical practice that would be “in default of the human dimension”: the clinical phenomenologist recognizes that if “the human being is capable of madness,” mental suffering is a “properly human dimension” ( Maldiney 1986: 9–10; de Waelhens 1972 ). Accordingly, what clinical phenom Oenology aims at is the analysis of what it means to “be a human being.” Phenomenology, Heidegger writes, is a method that, as such, is “directly opposed to the naïveté of a haphazard, ‘immediate’, and unreflective ‘beholding’ ”; phenomenological analysis aims at “something that proximally and for the most part does not show itself at all... something that lies hidden ” (Heidegger 2001: 61; emphasis in the original). As phenomenological, analysis is conceived of variously, depending on theoretical positions that otherwise tear apart members of the phenomenological corpus. Nonetheless, practi ally, it carries at least one consensus: we could not practice clinical phenomenology if we were not making ourselves capable “of welcoming and accepting impartially, without re striation and without being deformed by our own theoretical and intellectual prejudices or by personal and emotional censures, what we always and invariably obtain from our analysands by listening to them and observing them” ( Boss 1980: 152). Under the motto “phenomenology,” one here aspires to “a description as freed from theory as possible” ( Blankenburg 2012: 22). Already, this descriptive approach requires to “return to the thing itself”: one must “return” below one’s “sedimented attainment,” and have the “rigor,” the “scientific courage” to renounce them ( Maldiney 1986: 11).

Armed with such method, phenomenological clinical practice does not restrict its scope to 4 pathology. Rather, it occurs before any attribution of normality or abnormality, to target 5 what constitutes both. Although this can be taken neither as its birth certificate, nor as its specificity, clinical phenomenology positions itself against any clinical practice that would be “in default of the human dimension”: the clinical phenomenologist recognizes that if “the human being is capable of madness,” mental suffering is a “properly human dimension” ( Maldiney 1986: 9–10; de Waelhens 1972 ). Accordingly, what clinical phenom Oenology aims at is the analysis of what it means to “be a human being.”

Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology # Structural Analysis In its anthropological vein, the phenomenological analysis of being-human is, notably, an investigation of a singular person’s history: listening to the patient as an individual sub Sect aims at a reconstitution of lived experiences and a thoughtful reconstruction of the inner history of life. This history is the “unique, unrepeatable Bela son” of (p. 219) experiential contents, as lived by the individual person. By identifying this history, one is led to “what is most individual in the individual,” to the “origin or center of 6 [his] lived experiences” ( Binswanger 1994b: 76, 85, 81).

The introduction of such phenomenological anthropology in clinical practice has partici Bated in the evolution from “an objectifying science to a subjectifying science” (Bin swinger 1994c: 65). Certainly, “phenomenology is not a purely subjective method” (ibid.) but its clinical practice has been constructed against a conception of the relationship be tween a clinician and a patient reduced to the treatment of a disease by a therapy. What phenomenology reminds the clinician of is that an encounter essentially consists in “that you never see an isolated phenomenon but the phenomenon always takes place on the 7 background of a self” ( Binswanger 1994c: 58). Once this foundation of clinical practice is recognized, research can and must investigate the mode of encounter by which we specifically relate to others as subjects.

Phenomenologically, this primarily means a “return” to the “basic phenomenon” (Bin swinger 1994c: 65), that is, the person. No further step is needed with Husserl’s phe nomenology to recognize that this person, the so-called subject, is structurally directed toward something other than himself, the so-called object. Such is intentionality. Follow ing this structural analysis of consciousness, on the one hand, intentionality, rather than a cut, is a “unitary relation between transcendental subjectivity and transcendental object 8 tivity” (Binswanger 1975a: 207); and on the other hand, intentionality is a transcend Fence: with the notion of intentionality, “the phenomenologist does not say: there is an object contained in perception” ( Binswanger 1994c: 47); rather, he seeks to understand how the subject is structured by “the surpassing towards the world or transcendence” ( Binswanger 1965: 17).

However, if “a subject can never be represented in its subjectivity otherwise than as a pri Cary immanence,” if, thinking in terms of subjectivity, “one has from the start necessarily attributed to everything else the character of objectivity,” if one has “immediately and radically separated the human being from what comes to him” ( Boss 1980: 91) then, to grasp the human being in its uniqueness and unity, phenomenological research must “re turn” from intentionality to a pre-subjective and pre-objective mode of being-in-the- 9 world.

With this phenomenology, the clinician defends that being-human never consists in “sur passing oneself subjectively towards things or let them objectively enter into oneself” ( Boss 1980: 93, see also 63); rather, one is in contact with the moment where “the union of the subjective and the objective is felt as still un-split” ( Blankenburg 1986: Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology 137). Here, with Heidegger, the notion of transcendence changes meaning: being-human is being-in-the-world, that is, it is neither transcending oneself nor being transcended: it is being transcendence. Thus, if clinical phenomenology follows the notion of transcend Fence as its methodological Ariadne’s thread, here it is because it aims at “the descrip son of the modalities of the unity of self and world” ( Binswanger 1955b: 228).

Clinical phenomenology here departs from the structural analysis of consciousness in terms of subject–object intentional correlations; resisting any “subjectivation of transcend Fence” ( Boss 1980: 97), its anthropological investigation of the meaning of beinghuman becomes an ontological investigation of being -human. And if the clinician cannot bracket the ontological (p. 220) dimension of being-human, it is because the question of who the human being is cannot be tackled without referring to the question of the meaning of be ing (Heidegger 2001: 119–120, see also 122) because “the human being can only be hu man by understanding being”: being-human is “standing in the openness of being” (Hei dagger 2001: 121). This definition of the human being, ontological rather than anthropo logical, is prolonged clinically by the view that human existence is “trans-subjective”: it ought to be conceived of as the unity of oneself with “something universal, ‘objective,’ and impersonal” ( Binswanger 1975b: 234). For phenomenology, the challenge of this analysis is nothing minor: from there, it cannot retreat from the exigency to work with what lurks below the conscious subject.

Transcendental Analysis Always reaching further down, clinical phenomenology then offers not only a structural analysis of being-human as being-in-the-world, but also a transcendental analysis of be ing-human as “coming-to-the-world” ( Blankenburg 2012: 146). What clinical phenomenal ogy here aims at is not the static description of experiential contents, but the genesis of 10 human existence, its transcendental constitution. Here, clinical phenomenology per Utes a “return to Husserl”—without unconditionally presupposing subject–object intel 11 tonality (Blankenburg 2012: 32).

To account for “the construction, the constitution, or the genesis ” of experience, “we must go down to the first ‘beginnings’ of conscious experience” ( Binswanger 1965: 35; empha 12 sis in the original). Clinical phenomenology is here looking for the constitutive found son of being-human, and its failure as a “fundamental disorder” ( Blankenburg 2012: 15– 21). It is the basis that is aimed at: whether the transcendental frame continues to sup port the human being as the very ground of his existence, whether the human being has a relation to himself and to the world that allows him to be transcendentally carried (Blankenburg 1991: 230). Phenomenologically, the return to the base does not operate or does not operate only through a transcendental reduction by which “all given (including the particular empirical subject) is simply described as constituted in the transcendental ego” ( Blankenburg 2012: 31); the “source of all constitution” is not only conceptualized as the “pure ego” that would fulfill the function of constituting an experience of “this is 13 me ( Ich bin es )” (Binswanger 1960: 117). Below such a subjectivist approach, clinical Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology phenomenology is deployed further, by continuously renewing the fruitful infidelities that it operates by each of its motions from Husserl to Heidegger to Husserl. The transcended tal “base” is an “evidence,” a selbstverständlichkeit, namely, that which is self-understood (Blankenburg 2012: 99). A syllabic reading of this single word, selbstverständlichkeit, suggests “a relation to the pre-intentional world which is not yet polarized on a human ‘I’. What dominates here is an understanding that includes an a-personal, infinitive charac ter. Human consciousness is only the anonymous stage on (p. 221) which this is played and we do little more than participating, almost by accident, to this self-understanding of 14 things” ( Blankenburg 2012: 99). At its base, far from “our own work,” experience ap pears primarily as the work of a passive synthesis—and here transcendental phenomenal ogy is linked with genetic analysis.

Clinical phenomenology is here confronted with “an anonymous transcendental constitu son which has always already occurred” ( Blankenburg 2012: 106). It does not abandon the subject—it could’t do so without losing itself as a phenomenological clinical practice —but reveals a subjectivity ordered to “a fundamental receptivity” ( Blankenburg 2012: 73); the subject is a “product of coagulation” that emerges from an a-subjective “orig nary source,” from the “anonymous sea of everything that happens ‘by itself’,” while one’s individual consciousness, “continually forgetful of its origin,” erects the “I” as its transcendental source. Being-human here is conceived dialectically as a possibility to “let oneself be as taking foundation and giving foundation,” a “mutual relationship between being-summoned-to-respond and being-able-to-respond” ( Blankenburg 2012: 124–128, 110).

This characterization of being-human imposes its requirements to the conception and practice of analysis within clinical phenomenology. As a transcendental foundation, the “base” is always presupposed; it not only “does not require clarification,” but also it is “largely unfit to clarification” ( Blankenburg 2012: 101). Transcendental evidence is “inc cessible,” “silenced,” subjected to a “constant omission,” “fallen into oblivion and igno Dance” ( Blankenburg 1986: 138).

To lift “the mask of the banal” and reveal the “basal,” it is necessary for clinical phenom nologists to practice a transcendental analysis, in order to touch what, by definition, “does not let itself be apprehended in the frame of cognition, which itself remains en aged within the natural evidence.” This work thus requires the clinician to take a few steps “in the direction of a self-alienation, a certain detachment from one’s anchor in the soil of the healthy habituality of everyday consciousness.” This is exactly the epoché for clinical phenomenology: a “radical detachment—methodically directed... detachment from the evidences of everyday existence” ( Blankenburg 2012: 83, 108–109).

The epoché is not only the suspension of theoretical knowledge and related judgments; it is not only a methodological prescription to limit the scope of phenomenology to the de Ascription of “what is immanent to consciousness” ( Binswanger 1994c: 46); rather, the epoché is a “technical device of any phenomenological endeavor” and as such it is a Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology “bracketing” of factual reality, a suspension of the Canalization of the transcendental base 15 (Blankenburg 2012: 87, 27).

It should be clear that such phenomenological suspension is not the pathological loss of natural evidence; the epoché is not madness. The patient must make “desperate efforts to maintain a minimum of evidences necessary for survival,” and he must fight against the “terror about the lack of ground of his own existence”; conversely, the phenomenologist fights against the “inclination of life” that opposes “considerable resistance against the realization of a epoché ”; what is “experienced as a singular ‘agony’ ” by one “must be ar duously conquered” by the other ( Blankenburg 2012: 97, 133, 93, 90). Therefore, the Olin ician should never neglect the difference between, on the one hand, the phenomenology cal alienation from his habitual self, which he exercises by practicing the epoché, and on the other hand, (p. 222) the pathological alienation from the ground of his existence which the patient is subjected to in an immeasurable lack of being. This difference is every time reaffirmed by the “sense of foreignness” which may grab the clinician facing a patient who irremediably resists being captured by descriptions and analyses (Blankenburg 2012: 35, see also 81 and 84–85).

Here we will not go into the details of how the transcendental “presupposition” or “trust” 16 could be broken by psychopathology (Binswanger 1960: 16); we will not explore either the different modes of “suppletion” which may occur when the ground collapses and when the “I” must assume itself the task of the transcendental, with the aim to give him self some foundation (Blankenburg 2012: 129–131, 106, 109, 172, 108, 127). Rather, by way of conclusion, we will consider how the phenomenological analysis of being-human informs the clinical encounter.

Encountering As a physician, the clinician may want to intervene in order to “modify the disorders and fill in the lacks”; thereby he would put himself in a position to “master what is ‘occur ring’ ” and may try to “understand what is occurring as something a prior defined and modifiable, and thus heteronomous.” However, as a phenomenologist, the clinician prefers “to make the ‘occurring’ emerge” ( Blankenburg 1986: 135). But what is “the oc Burring”?

By letting himself be “engaged-by-the-occurring,” the clinician aims at giving a place not only to the disease, but also to the “person of the other human being” who presents him self (Blankenburg 1986: 144). Here, the “occurring” is the other, “uncapturable” ( Shun and Maldiney 1986: 24). To allow the encounter with the other, one must suspend the frontier between normality and pathology, and work with the structure and constitution which is common to every human being—which is thus common to both the clinician and the patient. This anthropological orientation of phenomenology argues that the clinical 17 encounter must mobilize the empathy of the clinician (Binswanger 1994c: 55–56), in or Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology der to deploy a “relationship of two human beings ‘with-each-other and apart-from-each- 18 other’ [miteinander auseinander ]” (Binswanger 1994a: 206).

Yet, there is another reading of the human being’s mode of being-with others, a reading which is not only anthropological but ontological, and which “allows us to get rid of the concept of ‘psychic empathy’, a particularly obscure problem [oppressing] psychology and psychopathology” ( Boss 1980: 126). Here, it is argued that the “partnership” be tween humans is not an empathic projection from one individual to another, but “the car Dying of a load distributed upon both the physician and the patient” ( Binswanger 1971: 154). As the “originary understanding of being” is a “fundamental feature carrying all of man,” each singular human being “participates with others in the opening and clearing of the world” ( Boss 1980: 126). Here we must understand that if “phenomenology... me thodically takes the encounter as the object of its experience” ( Blankenburg 1986: 145), such encounter is less (p. 223) a relationship between two autonomous and heterogeneous singularities than a relation of the human-being to the “foundation of all that is,” to the “originary understanding of Being” ( Boss 1980: 87).

Our question reoccurs: What is the “occurring” by which the clinician lets himself be en aged? Is it Being for the phenomenologist, whereas it is the other for the psychoanalyst? To keep this question open, let us go back to the patient’s speech. As reported by Blankenburg, it demonstrates a fundamental lack that tortures patients: “they speak, al ways anew, of the fact that they need a ‘support’ ” ( Blankenburg 2012: 121, see also 19). But who or what could provide such support? Is it Being as “anonymous natural evi Fence”? Is such support provided by others, those who can make themselves be “interme diaries of this natural evidence which [the patient] aspires to” ( Blankenburg 2012: 122), those through whom there “radiates a force that is formative of the world” ( Blankenburg 2012: 138)? Is existential support incarnated by another singular human being who not only “gives support but is himself this support” ( Blankenburg 2012: 120)? We will not close these questions here by giving an answer that would abusively reduce to one the plurality of grounds which could give transcendental support. “All these possibilities con scantly impose themselves” on the patient, and the “only thing that is clear” to the phe nomenologist who is listening to the patients’ voices, is that the human being cannot be for himself his own support (Blankenburg 2012: 122); the man suffers unbearably and in tolerably when he “must build his own personal world” ( Binswanger 1975b: 235); the 19 world darkens when the human being shines for himself as his own sun.

Our question reoccurs: What is the “occurring” by which the clinician lets himself be en aged? Is it Being for the phenomenologist, whereas it is the other for the psychoanalyst? To keep this question open, let us go back to the patient’s speech. As reported by Blankenburg, it demonstrates a fundamental lack that tortures patients: “they speak, al ways anew, of the fact that they need a ‘support’ ” ( Blankenburg 2012: 121, see also 19). But who or what could provide such support? Is it Being as “anonymous natural evi Fence”? Is such support provided by others, those who can make themselves be “interme diaries of this natural evidence which [the patient] aspires to” ( Blankenburg 2012: 122), those through whom there “radiates a force that is formative of the world” ( Blankenburg 2012: 138)? Is existential support incarnated by another singular human being who not only “gives support but is himself this support” ( Blankenburg 2012: 120)? We will not close these questions here by giving an answer that would abusively reduce to one the plurality of grounds which could give transcendental support. “All these possibilities con scantly impose themselves” on the patient, and the “only thing that is clear” to the phe nomenologist who is listening to the patients’ voices, is that the human being cannot be for himself his own support (Blankenburg 2012: 122); the man suffers unbearably and in tolerably when he “must build his own personal world” ( Binswanger 1975b: 235); the 19 world darkens when the human being shines for himself as his own sun.

Let us conclude here by rephrasing this view. Whether one favors one or another ap roach to clinical phenomenology, the “only thing that is clear” is that, descriptively, structurally and transcendentally, the human being cannot bear isolation—from himself, others, the world, Being. The human being can—and must—be separated—from himself, others, the world, Being—to be a singular subject, but this separation cannot be a rup Cure. This “cannot” may be diversely interpreted as a vital, existential, anthropological, ontological impossibility. The roots, scope, and consequences of such conceptions of hu man impossibility are fundamentally different from each other, but for the sake of charac terizing clinical phenomenology here, what matters first and foremost is not to construct Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology them as philosophical antinomies but as clinical necessities. Only by setting concepts in motion within such plurality of meanings, can one respect the singularities of others.

3 ( ) Heidegger himself deals with this issue, in concrete terms. Being and Time states: “Casein is that being whose being itself is at issue. You are concerned with me, and I with you. Thereby, are you doing the analytic of Da-Rein? No. But you see me, and I am present to you, within the horizon of the determinations of Da-Rein as given by the analytic of Casein. We stated that the analytic of Da-Rein interprets the being of this being. And if you Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology now speak to me without doing the analytic of Da-Rein, then this is not speaking in an on tological sense. But you are directed toward me as the one who exists in an Antic sense. Casein analysis is Antic. The analytic of Casein is ontologic... The decisive point is that the particular phenomena, arising in the relationship between the analysand and the ana Cyst, and belonging to the respective, concrete patient, be broached in their own phenom ecological content and not simply be classified globally under existentialia” ( Heidegger 2001a: 124).

4 ( ) This contrasts with Jasper 1997: 4, 45–46.

5 ( ) See e.g. Blankenburg 2012: 27; Binswanger 1971: 149; Binswanger 1994a: 207.

6 ( ) See also Binswanger 1994a: 214, 1947: 98, 1955a: 235.

7 ( ) See also Binswanger 1994c: 54, 1994a: 205–206.

8 ( ) See also Blankenburg 2012: 23.

9 ( ) See e.g. Binswanger 1947: 101–102; Blankenburg 2012: 12.

10 ( ) See also Binswanger 1960: 16–17.

11 ( ) See also Mishara 1986: 181, 186, 191.

12 ( ) See also Binswanger 1960: 13.

13 ( ) “In contrast to Husserl and his phenomenology,... being human is fundamentally stated as Da-Rein. This is done explicitly, as opposed to the characterizations of the hu man being as subjectivity and as transcendental Ego-consciousness” ( Heidegger 2001: 120).

14 ( ) Heidegger 2001: 122.

15 ( ) See also Binswanger 1960: 16–17.

16 ( ) See also Blankenburg 2012: 111, 128–129.

17 ( ) See also Binswanger 1960: 70.

18 ( ) See also Boss 1980: 132; Blankenburg 1986: 137; Binswanger 1994c: 36–37, 66; Blankenburg 2012: 88–89.

19 ( ) Binswanger, quoting Jeremiad Gotthelf: “Think how dark the world would become if man sought to be his own sun” ( Binswanger 1975b: 235).

Dorothée Legrand Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology Dorothée Legrand is a researcher at “Archives Husserl” (ENS, CNRS, Paris). She holds a PhD in philosophy and is trained in clinical psychology. Thematically, her work focuses on the notion of selfhood and subjectivity. Her publications include ‘Subjective and Physical Dimensions of Bodily Self-Consciousness, and their Dis-inch ration in Anorexia Nervosa’ and, with P. Ruby, ‘What is Self Specific? A Theoretical Investigation and a Critical Review of Neuroimaging Results’. She is also the editor of Dimensions of Bodily Subjectivity.

Clinical Phenomenology: Descriptive, Structural, and Transcendental Phe nomenology Dorothée Legrand is a researcher at “Archives Husserl” (ENS, CNRS, Paris). She holds a PhD in philosophy and is trained in clinical psychology. Thematically, her work focuses on the notion of selfhood and subjectivity. Her publications include ‘Subjective and Physical Dimensions of Bodily Self-Consciousness, and their Dis-inch ration in Anorexia Nervosa’ and, with P. Ruby, ‘What is Self Specific? A Theoretical Investigation and a Critical Review of Neuroimaging Results’. She is also the editor of Dimensions of Bodily Subjectivity.

Genetic Phenomenology # Genetic Phenomenology Anthony J. Steinbeck The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article presents the dimension of genetic phenomenology within the thought of Ed Fund Husserl. It introduces the relation of phenomenological matters and methods, and outlines the possible spheres of phenomenology: static, genetic, and generative. It then explores the co-emergence of static and genetic phenomenological methods and de scribes the matters that are peculiar to each. By focusing specifically on genetic phenom ecological method, the article describes key genetic phenomena, such as normality and abnormality as they concern the constitution of lived sense, embodied existence, and sub jectivity. After explaining in what way the normal and the pathological express the con cordance or harmony and disharmony in the development of meaning, it describes the original notion of the optimal as a new notion of normality in phenomenology, as well as the ways in which some norms can be transcended from within optimal experience. The article concludes by elaborating the relation between stasis and genesis.

Keywords: phenomenology, Edmund Husserl, static phenomenology, genetic phenomenology, normal, abnormal, pathological, optimal, norm, phenomenological method # Introduction PHENOMENOLOGY is a reflective attentiveness not only to “what” is given in experience, but to “how” those matters are given. Rather than taking our everyday acceptances of re laity for granted, it wants “to bracket” them (what is known as the epoché) and trace these acceptances to their origins of sense, namely, to their sense-giving processes (what is known as the reduction). These sense-giving features can be as narrow as a single act of consciousness, or more dynamically, lived-bodily kinaestheses, or again, subjectivity, in tersubjectivity, the world-horizon, the earth-ground, or the interrelation of home-worlds and alien-worlds. As such, phenomenology as a whole Inquires after modes of meaning givenness (constitution), the structures of those meanings (material or Genetic Phenomenology formal essences), the powers and limits of the meaning-giving, and in some instances, the very process of carrying out phenomenology itself.

Accordingly, just what “matters” can be given in phenomenological description depends in part upon how the phenomenologist approaches them. The way of approach we call a “method.” Phenomenological method is a style of openness that in turn allows one to be struck by the phenomena, no matter how strangely that experience may seem at first blush.

There are many methodological procedures that characterize the overall project of phe nomenology, too many to detail here. However, there are three basic ones that can be rec ognized as static, genetic, and generative. A static phenomenology can describe both what something is in terms of its essential structures, and how it is given in a slice of time —“now,” for example. A genetic phenomenology covers the unfolding of sense (its “gene sis”), and its span can be as broad as the life of an individual as described in the process of self-temporalization. A generative phenomenology can be understood in two ways. On the one hand, it deals with the geo-historical, social, normative generation of meaning in home-worlds and alien-worlds as that meaning is generated over the generations; on the other hand, it concerns the whole of phenomenology itself as the very movement of mean ing givenness and the generation of structures, spanning more particular static, genetic, and generative dimensions. I will focus on the scope and field of genetic phenomenology (Steinbeck 1995: chapter 12).

(p. 226) Static and Genetic Method It was in 1921 that Edmund Husserl, the so-called father of phenomenology, found him self already pushing the bounds of his own previous conception of phenomenological method. It was also at this time that he was led to formulate explicitly the difference be tween static and genetic phenomenological methods (Husserl 2001: section 4).

Husserl’s writings on static and genetic methods not only mark his explicit effort to for Emulate a difference internal to phenomenological method in terms of static and genetic phenomena; they also show the distinctive traits of each method and how the methods are to be organized in terms of the motivational descriptor of “leading clue.” Since the process of questioning back is a questioning after founding relations of validity (accord Jingly, “the questioning back after genesis”), the question of genesis can operate in tan dem with a “regressive” phenomenological approach that questions back archaeologically, as it were, into founding layers of experience.

Husserl was not the first to distinguish between static and genetic elements of expert Once. Husserl himself acknowledges this by referring to the difference between static and genetic method in the same terms Wilhelm Dilthey used for psychology, namely, as “de scriptive” [ beschreibende ] and “explanatory” [ erklärend ]. Whereas Dilthey takes description as interpretive description and explanation as something the natural sciences do, Husserl takes descriptive phenomenology in a narrower, “static”

Genetic Phenomenology sense in order to contrast it with a genetic phenomenological research perspective that takes up an interpretative position with respect to the teleological genesis of sense. Lurking in the background of Husserl’s formation is not only Dilthey, but also Brentano and his distinction between descriptive psychology and genetic and physio logical psychology.

The originality of Husserl’s distinctions between static and genetic phenomenology con Fists in the fact that Husserl was led to formulate the difference between methods and matters from motivations internal to the development of phenomenology itself. Because Husserl had described genetic matters that exceeded the scope of static constitution, in Eluding phenomena like apperception, normality and abnormality, kinaesthesis, associa son, etc.—phenomena that came under the general title of “primordial constitution”— Husserl was provoked by the very matters themselves to catch up reflectively with his own descriptions. This means that Husserl had undertaken genetic analyses implicitly without phenomenology having been explicitly cognizant of itself having this genetic methodological dimension. Moreover, at least on Husserl’s own account, his distinction between static and genetic matters predates even this. For example, in June 1918, Husserl writes to Paul Natorp that “... al ready, for more than a decade, I have overcome the level of static Platonism and have sit Bated the idea of transcendental genesis in phenomenology as its main theme” ( Husserl 1994: 137).

Looking back from our privileged perspective, with the distinction between static and ge netic method and matters already in hand, we can say that Husserl’s initial preoccupation was with static phenomena and an approach that was “static.” Two aspects are captured under the rubric of static phenomenology. First, there is a constitutive approach that is concerned with how something is given or modes of givenness, and second, there is a con Bern with essential structures. In Husserl’s terminology, a static method can address both (p. 227) “phenomenological” (i.e. constitutive) as well as “ontological” (i.e. essential) di Pensions of experience. Thus, a static approach can interrogate the interplay of intention and fulfillment, the meant features of an object, the Poetic qualities of an act, etc., as well as the structural or essential possibilities of the particular object or act within the intel tonal correlation. Here one would examine the structures and the being of these strum Cures (e.g. formal and material essences, regions, and so forth).

By genesis Husserl understands three variations of experience: genesis within the purely active sphere of experience where the ego functions in rational acts; genesis between the active and passive spheres of experience, where we trace the origins of ac tivity in passivity (or between the judicative in the perceptual spheres of experience); and finally, “primordial constitution” as a phenomenology of passive experience or passive genesis of sense, including apperception, motivation, affection and association, kinaesthe sis, etc. Ultimately these three dimensions of genesis are bound to the analysis of the genesis of the Tactical subject or what he calls a “monad.”

Genetic Phenomenology # Genetic Phenomenological Method The genuine benefit of a genetic analysis is the fact that it can treat the integrity of the becoming of the individual person in a way that a static or even a generative method might miss. For example, the life of the individual or the synchronic community is some thing that is treated within the scope of a genetic phenomenology, and the person can be regarded as “absolute” within this dimension. The individual person in this sense has an irreducible sense within genetic self-temporalization, as an individual and not only by having a place within historical “Generativity.” The danger with a genetic method alone, however, would be the temptation to understand the individual person as fully self-suffix sent or as self-grounding (Steinbeck 2014: chapters 1 and 7). If we understand the Hindi visual in his or her own way as absolute, this absoluteness is nonetheless grounded in the Generative movement of meaning, and in this way is not self-grounding.

Nevertheless, there are indeed deeper temporal considerations that bear on the subject that are not just momentary conscious intending. For example, when a reproductive act of remembering is motivated (e.g. by something prominent in the present linking up with a Pretended past), “I” am awakened to it in a remembering, and a deeper, broader tempo ral life emerges co-relative to the emergence of an object as such. Remembering is an identifying activity that can repeatedly come back to the same presentation beyond the present, also conferring a density on the object as such over time. Through iterative re membering, we arrive at an identical unending time in the mode of unending past such that the whole of subjectivity, in terms of my genesis of time, cannot have a starting point “in” the past, thus cannot be born, and in this respect “is” “eternal” ( Husserl 2001: 468– 469).

Accordingly, a genetic phenomenology accounts for how the subject can be given to itself in the process of constituting time; insofar as it is self-temporalizing it constitutes the very sense of past, present, and future, and therefore cannot be “before” or “after” itself. Accordingly, gaps in consciousness like sleep, fainting spells, or any disruption of sense are integrated into a higher arching concordance of temporal continuity such that there are no decisive gaps in such self-temporalization. In this respect, I am given to myself constitutively (p. 228) as not arising, not ending, but in the eternal process of self-genesis (Husserl 2001: 467, 469, 471).

Phenomenology of genesis therefore accounts for how I am not temporalized from the outside (i.e. locatable in objective time) since I am the source of that time. To attempt to locate the self-temporalizing process in time would be to presuppose object-time as the already constituted standard, and then to apply it to myself as the measure of temporality, becoming forgetful of myself as self-temporalizing in this very process. Certainly, there are beginnings and endings within temporal genesis. But within the gene sis of self-temporalization, I am not before my own birth and I am not after my death, since the very senses of before and after are constituted within temporal genesis.

Genetic Phenomenology Husserl thought that the best way to handle more complex matters in phenomenology (like the problem of self-temporalization, or later the problem of cultural communities and historicity, in short, “generativity”) was to prepare the groundwork with static investiga sons. Following such “preparatory” work, it would be suitable to proceed to higher con stitutive levels of analysis. Initially, he was led to genetic matters of experience that de Banded a formulation of a genetic phenomenological method.

Normality and Abnormality as Key Genetic # Matters What are these genetic matters and clues that motivate a genetic phenomenology? There are several matters that are evoked and described in a genetic phenomenology. They in Elude, but are not limited to, a “phenomenology of the so-called unconscious,” the laws of genesis in passive synthesis or laws of association, the intentionality of drive and instinct, the constitution of habit, self-temporalization, and many other themes (Husserl 2001: 201, 214). One main set of themes that arises explicitly when Husserl moves to a genetic method is the complex of “normality” and “abnormality.”

Husserl’s genetic phenomenology of normality and abnormality gives us clues, but only clues, concerning how we can tell if, for example, a perceptual object is not “real,” but merely hallucinatory. This is a complex issue because of the lived process of “normalize son” in the dynamic sense of becoming normal (and abnormal) and the constitution of norms within experience.

On the one hand, we would have to ask if the object responds to our efforts to vary it or if it gives itself correlative to kinaesthetic motivations in what he calls a “constitutive duet.” If that dynamic tension that qualifies the relation is lost; if the thing is reduced to the sub Sect or the subject to the thing in experience, it could be given as a hallucinatory object. In essence, for Merleau-Monty, this means that the hallucinatory object lacks the structure of “depth”.

On the other hand, what constitutes the real as such is precisely what is able to count as “objective” in experience. For example, within a static dimension of experience, what is given now is “normal,” and “real.” The system of norms and indexes to experience are given in their complexity, in one stroke, “now.” But he asks, what good is this if it is mere ly given now; it has no temporal density (Husserl 2001: section 24).

(p. 229) When we broaden our analyses to a genetic phenomenology, we can account for the enduring appearance of the object as it unfolds concordantly over time and can be identified as such in temporal iterations. The same holds on the side of the lived body in the mode of experiencing. However, even this is incomplete because it might be valid only for me in my lifetime.

Genetic Phenomenology This motivates the movement to the designation of the real as what is intersubjectively valid, such that objectivity is given in the intersubjectivity of perspectives. This, however, still falls short because of the generative differences of “normal” and “abnormal” lifeworlds or “home-worlds” and “alien-worlds.” Thus, to give a rich account of the real or the “object” as such, he has to turn to a phenomenological analysis of the normal and the abnormal, and this unfolds in genetic and generative analyses, and to questions of con cordance/discordance, optimality/non-optimality, typicality/typicality, and familiarity/un familiarity.

Accordingly, the phenomenology of psychopathology would have to be adduced on both genetic and generative levels. What might be diagnosed as “pathological” in a communal or historical context might be optimal and hypernormal on an individual level. In addition, the optimal individual might throw into relief the historical context as “abnormal” in Bela son to the new norms that are instituted through the optimal style of the individual. Dis cordance on one level might be (but is not necessarily) optimal on another.

With these terms—normal and abnormal—he does not mean a statistical, static, Medici nal, natural, or innate sense of them. Rather, normal designates the way in which a mean ingful world takes shape. The first set of genetic concepts of normal and abnormal are “concordance” and “discordance,” respectively. Concordance is the way in which appear Dances link up and harmonize to form an ongoing, unfolding development of meaning, like when I touch a smooth surface and each smooth aspect harmoniously implicates and con firms the next appearance. A discordance constitutes an anomaly of appearances that ruptures the concordance, and which may continue for an indefinite period of time (inst tooting an abnormality). However, there is an overarching concordance, and thus an over arching normality when the rupture (anomaly or abnormality) is integrated into the over all flow, or again, when the later harmony of sense matches and reaches back to, while continuing the previous concordance.

The Normal as the Optimal But Husserl adds something more and contributes to his understanding of the “real.” Complementing the account of normality as concordance is a deeper analysis of how the lived body is involved with the world from a certain perspective. If the lived body is inter meshed in a network of phenomena, as Husserl’s analyses point out, then there will be a perspective or a situation that will be preferred as better or best for experiencing. As Husserl maintains, lived-corporeality is a system of good and bad presentations; and to this system, in turn, belongs the idea of optimal modes of givenness (Husserl 1973a: 121). These qualitative senses of normality and abnormality that also reach into dimensions of optimality are strikingly similar to some of Georges Canguilhem’s early work on the nor mal and the pathological, and anticipatory of Maurice Merleau- Monty’s genetic phenomenology of the constitution of the thing.

Genetic Phenomenology (p. 230) First, a system of appearances is optimal insofar as it presents the most of the same thing with the greatest richness and differentiation. This is one way in which Husserl understands the “real” thing, namely, as “optimal,” and it is the genetic expires ion of the “objective sense.” Here, the optimal is the greatest unity with greatest differ entiation, and not just differences. In this instance, one does not understand experience as concordant or discordant; rather, one speaks now of normal experiences being “bet ter,” “richer,” and abnormal ones as “diminished” or “worse.”

To say that we “prefer” such a situation means that “normally” we tend toward the “maxi mum” of richness or maximum of focus in which the object is both sharp and differential ed, and not when we are aesthetically uncomfortable or unbalanced (for instance, when the light or distance is excessive or deficient). Thus, to see something up close or in bright light does not necessarily mean that we see it optimally. (The same could be said of hearing notes sharply or crisply, on the one hand, and hearing things too loudly, on the other.) Similarly, an optimal (normal) lived body is often considered by Husserl as an inch grated, synaesthetic one.

The normal as optimal is what enriches experiences: The abnormal is one that not only gives the perceived object unusually, but worse, with less abundance of differences so that the experience itself is impoverished. The optimal is not a norm imposed from out side of human experience or, within a genetic framework, stemming from another as giv en to me. The optimal as norm is itself generated within experience and given as some thing experienced and experienceable by me. Optima are instituted within experience by the very fact that we take a perspective on things and are embedded in our surroundings, and that as perspectives on the world, we can be more open to the givenness of objects or more closed to them.

For example, I may never have had a pair of glasses, and still have a concordant view of the world. It is “normal” for me on this level of experience as concordant (without com paring them to others). In fact, depending upon the set of experiences, these condor dances would be optimal by the mere fact that so far there would be a best among them. All this takes place “pre-reflectively,” “passively” without necessarily paying any egoic at Mention to them. Now, if I try on a friend’s pair of glasses, I may become totally disorient ed; everything might be too blurry to function. This would constitute an anomaly or ab normality in my experience, constitutively speaking.

But let’s suppose that I find a pair of glasses lying around and I put them on, and sudden ly the trees have leaves clearly defined, people have spaces between their teeth, I can see street signs now in sharp relief as I go sailing past them in a car. The fact that the glasses interrupted my concordant (normal) view of the world would constitute an abnormality as a discordance. But in terms of optimality, it would constitute a new normality, and a new index to experience!

Genetic Phenomenology # Norm Transcendence Particularly striking and clearly original in Husserl’s work on normality and abnormality is not only the fact that he attempts to account for the internal development and institu son of norms in experience; more provocatively, he accounts for the possibility of ran Ascending those norms and instituting new ones, despite the presence of a norm that al ready functions (p. 231) teleologically for anomalies. This is to say both that experience is normal in transcending norms when it is optimalizing or creating new norms, and that anomaly can function innovatively in the institution of new norms. It is not given in ad Dance that the anomalies will be simply incorporated into a “higher,” overarching telex logical or concordant unity.

Even though a new vision can be understood as discordant in relation to the previous one (like in the example of optical surgery where the lived body itself is modified), an optimal vision can supplant the earlier one in a kind of re-valuation: The new one becomes normal and the old one now refers to the new optimal as its norm. Thus, it is possible for new op Lima to be formed, and it remains a question, observes Husserl, to what extent it is Feces chary for an originally instituted normal system to maintain perpetually its teleological sys 1 tem of reference.

Since a normal system is not guaranteed in advance and for all time, then what was seen previously only as a discordance, as a deviance, or as a modification can also function creatively as instituting new norms. It can be normalizing in this genetic dynamic sense, and it can only do this by transcending the previous norms. In order to transcend the norm, the fact that the deviation refers back to the norm teleologically cannot be deli chive. Such new optima and new norms are constituted, Husserl asserts, “ in spite of the 2 reference back to the earlier norm.”

Such a conflict of orders is open to what might be called a “transvaluation” of the normal and abnormal. We have seen that from a perspective in which the present norms are lived, a new perception or a new sense could be counted as abnormal. If, however, this discordant perspective were more than simply “new,” but also “a ‘finer’ organization of sense”; if the so-called disruptive, “unusual” or exceptional features of vision or touch were modes of “increased accomplishments,” they would not simply be anomalous or ab normal. The new optimal “would not be abnormal, but more normal than ever, increased 3 normality, and what was previously called normal [is now called] abnormal.” Husserl’s statement then implies a two-fold transvaluation. On the one hand, he accounts for the possibility that what is considered anomalous or abnormal on the axis of concordance may issue in a new normality as optimal, and on the other, what was at one time institute ed as a norm can be disclosed as “not as normal” or even as abnormal on the axis of ops malty.

If we were to advance to the intersubjective sphere of normality on the basis of what has been discussed, we would see similar implications. The greatest number of cases, the ma jority of instances, the average could not make up a normal society because it may not be Genetic Phenomenology optimal in its context; indeed, the average could be abnormal if the average were not op tidal or concordant. On the other hand, the view of optimality is not elitist because the (p. 232) overwhelming majority could express the optimal mode of life for that world. The optimal is not associated with the “few” any more than the abnormal is expressive of socalled “deviant behavior” because it is the richness of the experience that constitutes the optimal, not the number of people who have the experience.

Suffice it to mention that there are two additional conceptual sets of normality and abhor malty that pertain to a generative phenomenology (not to be confused with a genetic phenomenology). These other two are typicality and a-typicality, and familiarity and unfa miliarity. Within a generative phenomenology, taking all these meaning-constituting sens es of normal and abnormal, the “normal” life-world is constituted as the home-world; the “abnormal” life-world as the alien-world ( Steinbeck 1995: chapters 11–14).

Genesis and Stasis Conceptually speaking, both genesis and stasis arise co-originally for phenomenology. Yet it was only after explicitly tackling the problems of genesis and more complex features of experience that Husserl retroactively understood the problem of genesis not to be more complex than that of stasis, but rather, more concrete and more fundamental. Likewise, static matters were no longer seen to be “simple,” but now more abstract. This inversion was only discerned after having arrived explicitly at genesis through the leading clue of stasis, even though one could in no way derive genesis from stasis. Husserl came to see genesis as more fundamental than stasis, though pedagogically stasis guided us to the problem of genesis without the latter being reducible to the former (Husserl 1973a: 614– 617). In this way, static phenomenology is not to be taken as a final stance for phenom nology, but as a leading clue to constitutive ones, and further, to matters of genesis (and eventually to the problem of generativity) (Steinbeck 1995: section 4).

Although it deals with time, Husserl’s work on time-consciousness from his On the Phe nomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time is not really a fullfledged genetic analysis because it remains too formal: “Mere form is admittedly an ab traction, and thus from the very beginning the analysis of the intentionality of time-con sciousness and its accomplishment is an analysis that works on [the level of] abstract sons” (Husserl 2001: 173–174). Remaining solely on the level of time-constituting con sciousness (in terms of temporal modes of givenness such as impression, retention, pro Mention), is still too formal. This is due to the fact that an inquiry into the question of con stitution (which can be static) is not necessarily an inquiry into the problem of genesis. “Another constitutive phenomenology” that is not static, one named “phenomenology of genesis” or “genetic phenomenology,” is required for this. It is not until we get to the ha Ritual lived body, the problems of association, affection, concordance of a life, and individ Cation that the problem of genesis minimally comes into play in a more decisive manner.

Genetic Phenomenology Phenomenology of genesis then is the phenomenology of primordial becoming in time, of the genesis of one shape of consciousness emerging from another, acquiring a temporal opacity through the processes of motivation, apperception, affection, association, etc. In short, it is a phenomenology of what Husserl calls at this time, “facticity.” Within a static register now, one moves repressively to constitutive phenomenology.

(p. 233) Once Husserl has discussed the problem of genetic method and its matters in re Cation to static method and its matters, and has done this as a relation of leading clue, a peculiar reassessment takes shape. I have already noted that the “higher,” more complex phenomena of genesis are now seen as more fundamental; in relation to them, static phe novena are grasped as “finished,” as abstractions from temporality. But to recognize this is to reverse the direction of “leading clue.” For now it is no longer static phenomenology as a leading clue to genetic matters, but genesis that orders the investigation into static constitution and into structure. Now one must Inquire into the essential relations on the basis of phenomena that are disclosed genetically, which may entail, as it dissociative identity disorder for Husserl, that one revise the previous results of static analyses from the perspective of genesis— but which nevertheless had served formerly as a leading clue to genesis (see Husserl 2001: 664). This is the reason one can move from a genetic constitutive analysis back to an eidetic analysis, back to examining invariant structures in the natural attitude, back to empirical sciences, etc. It is also now that we are able to grapple with both the genesis of structure (i.e. the structure of individuation) as well as the very structure of genesis.

The formulation of static and genetic methods would not be the ultimate story told for phenomenology—if indeed one could give an exhaustive narrative of the generation of phenomenology and its possibilities. This is because the problem of generativity is a dis tinctive matter for phenomenology and the most encompassing dimension of phenomenal ogy. It concerns the geo-historical, social, normative dimension of experience. Genetic phenomenology however does provide an opening for novel, dynamic themes concerning our being-in-the-world.

2 ( ) Husserl, Ms. D 13 I, 175a: “(Dote ist denkbar, daß die leibliche Änderung auk ‘bessere’ Erscheinungen ergibt.) Wer ein pathologisches Sinnesorgan ursprünglich hatch, wer seine erst Constitution mit Erscheinungen geleistet hat, die normal ind,—Caber bei nachträglicher Gesundung des Organs Bird Cine nee optimal Erscheinungsgruppe der selben Binge konstituiert, und die bestimmt nun trot der Rückbeziehung auf die frühere Genetic Phenomenology Norm, die für die Durchhaltung desselben notwendig ist, im weiteren Leben (was das Ding selbst ist).” My emphasis.

3 ( ) Husserl, Ms. D 13 XVII, 14: “Mann wäre Cine ‘feinere’ Sinnesorganisation, mit ges tigerten Sehleistungen etc., night animal, sondern erst rest normal, gesteigert normal, und, was vorhin normal hieß, animal.” My emphasis.

Anthony J. Steinbeck Anthony Steinbeck is professor of philosophy and director of the Phenomenology Re search Center, Southern Illinois University Carbondale. He works in the areas of phe nomenology, social ontology, aesthetics, and religious philosophy. His books include Moral Emotions: Reclaiming the Evidence of the Heart, Phenomenology and Mysticism: The Verticality of Religious Experience (2007/9), and Home and Beyond: Generative Phenomenology after Husserl. He is editor-in-chief of the Conch Dental Philosophy Review and general editor of Northwestern University Press’s SPEP Series.

Phenomenology and Hermeneutics Phenomenology and Hermeneutics René Rosfort The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords The aims of phenomenology are to clarify, describe, and make sense of the structures and dynamics of pre-reflective human experience, whereas hermeneutics aims to articulate the reflective character of human experience as it manifests in language and other forms of creative signs. This suggests that the two approaches differ in aims, methods, and sub Sect matter. A closer look at the two disciplines reveals, however, that in terms of history, themes, and philosophical goals they have more in common than that which separates them. This chapter examines these differences and common features in the philosophy of Heidegger and Gadamer, then demonstrates how Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenolo gy provides us with a dialectical account of personal identity that can contribute to phe nomenological psychopathology. The combination of a phenomenological clarification of selfhood and a hermeneutical emphasis on interpretation paves the way for an interdisci plenary approach to mental illness.

Keywords: interpretation, language, experience, selfhood, hermeneutical phenomenology, personal identity # Introduction THE relationship between phenomenology and hermeneutics is complicated. They repre sent two major philosophical traditions that came to fruition in the twentieth century, al though both have deep roots in the history of philosophy. The complexity of the relation ship is visible in the historical development of the two traditions. Hermeneutics as the systematic study of interpretation goes back to antiquity beginning with the exegesis of the Homeric poems in the sixth century BCE and working its way up through Western in tellectual history in myriad forms of interpretation of religious, philosophical, juridical, and literary texts. Phenom nology as a philosophical discipline is much younger, going back only a couple of cen Buries to G. W. F. Hegel—or even younger still, as some argue, finding its proper begin Ding with Edmund Husserl at the turn of the twentieth century. Despite its long intellectual history, hermeneutics as a philosophical Phenomenology and Hermeneutics discipline grows out of phenomenology, and most of the major hermeneutical philoso hers of the twentieth century have a background in phenomenology and use phenom nological methods to develop their hermeneutical theories. On the other hand, phenom nology as an interpretation of experience is rooted in the hermeneutical tradition and draws heavily upon examinations of various themes and concepts developed throughout the long history of interpretation of texts (e.g. intention, clarification, understanding, meaning, significance, imagination).

The historical entanglement of phenomenology and hermeneutics is connected with the convoluted conceptual and theoretical relation between the two traditions. On the sur face, the distinction between the two philosophical approaches seems uncomplicated: phenomenology is the study of phenomena and hermeneutics is the interpretation of texts. That is to say, phenomenology deals with that which appears or is immediately giv en, whereas hermeneutics engages with that which has been written down or mediated through language. The aim of phenomenology is therefore to clarify, describe, and make sense of the structures and dynamics of pre-reflective human experience, whereas hermeneutics works with the (p. 236) reflective character of human experience as it Bani fests in language and other forms of creative signs. On closer inspection, though, the two philosophical approaches overlap with respect to methodology, themes, and philosophical aims, and the development of both approaches in the twentieth century has often taken the form of theoretical exchange and mutual critique. This interplay has led to both a sep ration of the two approaches into two distinct philosophical disciplines and to a comb nation in the form of a hermeneutical phenomenology.

In what follows, I will focus on the latter attempt to combine phenomenology and hermeneutics into a hermeneutical phenomenology with particular regard to the interred Bated issues of interpretation, selfhood, and personal identity. These issues are at the cen ter of the encounter of phenomenology and hermeneutics, and all three play a central role in phenomenological psychopathology.

The Fragile Self One of the basic claims of a hermeneutical approach to selfhood is that to be a self is to constantly make sense of and appropriate oneself through interpretations of the multifari ous aspects of human identity—concerning, amongst others, experience, biology, culture, history, and ethics. The human self is, therefore, fragile. It is both made and unmade through a hermeneutic, interpretive process.

Human beings are, as Charles Taylor famously argued, self-interpreting animals. We are interested in that which we experience, and with experience comes a need to articulate our experience “to make clearer the imports things have for us” ( Taylor 1985: 65). This means, Taylor goes on to argue, that “interpretation is not an optional extra, but an es sential part of our existence” ( Taylor 1985: 65). To interpret the what and the why of our experience, however, we need to pay careful attention to how we experience that which we experience. This interplay of the interpretative and experiential aspects of human ex Phenomenology and Hermeneutics perience is at the core of the relationship of phenomenology and hermeneutics. Human experience is a product of interpretation. Characterizing human experience as interpret son is not to denigrate the importance of experience or to categorize experiential subject tivity as somehow “lower” than scientific objectivity. The interpretative aspect of expert Once is tied to the peculiar individuality of experience, which means that two human be Dings never experience the same fact or occurrence in exactly the same way. One of the primary characteristics of human experience is that to experience something is not sim ply a passive reception of stimuli, but an active engagement with the world.

This is not to say that we can experience what we want to experience or that we some how create the world that we experience. One of the most important contributions of phe nomenology to twentieth-century philosophy is the distinction between subjectivity and subjectivism. Phenomenology is not concerned with describing idiosyncratic experiences, but rather with providing us with methodological tools to describe and makes sense of the impersonal experiential structures and dynamics that constitute human subjectivity (Gallagher and Zahavi 2012: 21–31). The individuality of human experience is bound to and conditioned by those experiential structures, and the sense of being an individual self is experienced through these invariant perceptual and temporal structures.

(p. 237) Still, there is more to the human self than the structures that make up human subjectivity. Hermeneutical phenomenology in the twentieth century developed as an at tempt to complement the phenomenological analysis of the experiential structures of sub jectivity with an account of the reflective character (e.g. Effective, cultural, historical, eth cal) selfhood. This is not to say that phenomenology is not interested in selfhood or has not produced influential accounts of selfhood. Rather, it is merely to point out that phe nomenological accounts of selfhood are typically interested in minimal accounts of the self that bring out the pre-reflective structures of self-awareness (Zahavi 2005: 99–145; Zahavi 2018; Gallagher 2017), hermeneutical accounts of selfhood are, by contrast, are more fleshed-out, in that they take into account self-reflection, culture, and history. One of the main arguments that led to this hermeneutical development of phenomenology is that to be a self is to do something with what we experience. The hermeneutics of self hood is produced by the tension between the pre-reflective certainty of being a self and the reflective doubt about how to be the self that one is. That is to say, the field of hermeneutics is grounded in two fundamental experiences, namely the experience of knowing that I am and the experience of not being certain of who I am. As Paul Ricoeur writes: The hermeneutics of the I am can alone include both the apodictic certainty of the Cartesian I think and the uncertainties, even the lies and the illusions, of the self, of immediate consciousness. It alone can yoke, side by side, the serene affirmation 1 I am and the poignant doubt Who am I? (2004: 259; translation slightly modified)

Our sense of selfhood is troubled by a sense of otherness. To be the self that I am I have to appropriate myself through a constant interpretation of the otherness that may not fea Cure explicitly in my self-awareness, that I perhaps do not experience clearly or that I may Phenomenology and Hermeneutics not acknowledge fully, but which nevertheless makes itself known as an inescapable as Sect of my identity. The term “otherness” tries to capture the heteronomous aspects of human selfhood that are not explicit in my experience of being a self. This otherness com rises, but is not restricted to, my biological makeup, cultural heritage, and social norms that orient my existence. To take just one example: the complexity of the fact that I am a biological organism on a par with other biological organisms in nature is not explicitly manifest in my experience of being a self. Phenomenology provides methodological tools to deal with my bodily experience, my so-called lived body ( Lab ), but is not able to ac count for my biological body ( Köper ), that is, the biological workings of, say, my kidney or the effects of my serotonin levels (Olson 1997: 147–148). I need to turn to biology and medicine to understand the (p. 238) workings of my biological organism, and—perhaps more importantly—to make sense of the effects that these aspects of my body have on my self-awareness and experience of the world. The biological workings of human experience may not be not part of my implicit sense of selfhood, but they are part of the otherness that constitutes my identity. A malfunctioning kidney and critically low levels of serotonin do have a significant effect on my experience (e.g. tiredness, headache, depletion, sad Bess, irritation), and consequently on my sense of selfhood. A hermeneutical account can integrate the biological explanations of these “phenomenologically blind” aspects of my identity in an account of human selfhood by making them explicit in the interpretative ap propriation of selfhood.

Thus, one of the primary differences between phenomenology and hermeneutics is that hermeneutics insists on this interpretative character of selfhood, whereas most contemn porary phenomenologists argue for a foundational notion of self as a constitutive feature of experience. The interpretative approach brings out the fragility of our self-awareness by articulating the ambiguous character of human selfhood. Our sense of being a self is the product of an ongoing dialectics of pre-reflective experience and reflective interpret son. This interplay of passivity and activity in the forms of experiential givenness and re Elective interpretation, alienation and intimacy, distance and appropriation constitute the philosophical core shared by the major philosophers who worked out the hermeneutical development of phenomenology in the twentieth century.

The Hermeneutical Development of Phenom # nology Martin Heidegger was the first phenomenologist who turned to hermeneutics. His pio Jeering work was the primary source of inspiration for hermeneutical philosophers in the twentieth century, and continues to heavily influence the development of philosophical hermeneutics in the twenty-first century. It is the hermeneutical core of the existential analysis in his most famous work from 1927, Being and Time, that initiated the hermeneu tidal turn in phenomenology. During the years of the First World War, Heidegger worked intensely with Husserl’s newly developed phenomenology, but he grew increasingly critic cal of Husserl’s conception of phenomenology as a “rigorous science.” Heidegger’s work Phenomenology and Hermeneutics can be read as a reaction to Husserl’s attempt to produce a phenomenology purified of cultural, historical, and existential concerns—focusing on pre-reflective experience in terms of, for example, the temporal structure of perception or the object-directedness of intentionality. Heidegger sets out to deconstruct this scientific ideal of purity by delving into the humdrum of everyday life. In other words, whereas Husserl—or at least the early Husserl—is primarily interested in producing a scientifically rigorous account of the sub jective structures of experience, Heidegger—or at least the early Heidegger—is interest ed in making sense of the existential concerns of a concrete self-in-the-world. As he writes in a series of lectures on phenomenology that he held in the year in which Being and Time was published: “The genuine, actual, though inauthentic understanding of the self takes place in such a way that this self, the self of our thoughtlessly random, common, everyday existence ‘reflects’ itself to itself out of that to which it has given itself over” ( Heidegger 1988: 161). Heidegger’s hermeneutical (p. 239) transformation of Husserlian phenomenal ogy is a turn from an interest in knowledge to an interest in existence. Or as he puts it in another lecture four years earlier: “What hermeneutics is really meant to achieve is not merely taking cognizance of something and having knowledge about it, but rather an ex istential knowing, i.e., a being [ein San ]. It speaks from out of interpretation and for the sake of it” (Heidegger 1999: 14). Our knowledge is the product of interpretation. As such, interpretation is not a choice or an add-on to the phenomenological description of expert Once. Experience is configured through interpretation because we are engaged with that which we experience, and we are engaged with experience because experience matters to us.

In fact, for Heidegger one of the primary problems with Husserlian phenomenology is that it does not pay enough attention to the Effective aspect of experience. It is the affect Dive aspect that reveals interpretation as an inescapable part of experience. We want to make sense of experience because we are affected by what we experience. Experience is structured normatively, and interpretation is our attempt to make sense the world, other people, and ourselves through the norms and values that orient our existence. As seen in the quote above, Heidegger approaches human selfhood in terms of the normative dis tinction between inauthentic and authentic existence. Most people, according to Heideg ger, live their lives through mindless small-talk and ossified habits, and their engagement with the world and other people is severely limited by hearsay, asinine curiosity, and para lazing ambiguity (Heidegger 2010: 161–173). The task for a human being is to disentan gle herself from the web of idle talk and the empty humdrum of everyday life and to strive for an authentic life by trying to make sense of what she actually cares about. We find ourselves thrown into a world that we have not chosen, and we live a life that we have on ly partial control over. Heidegger analyzes this existential condition with the concept of 2 Befindlichkeit. The concept is translated into English as “attunement” to capture the fact that we experience ourselves as Effectively attuned to our existence before our reflective attempt to make sense of ourselves. Heidegger’s use of the original German word, howev er, brings out a more complex understanding of human self-experience. Befindlichkeit, in Heidegger’s existential analysis, has a twofold significance comprising both the physical and the mental aspect of being-in-the world; or rather, it shows that we cannot separate can be read as a reaction to Husserl’s attempt to produce a phenomenology purified of cultural, historical, and existential concerns—focusing on pre-reflective experience in terms of, for example, the temporal structure of perception or the object-directedness of intentionality. Heidegger sets out to deconstruct this scientific ideal of purity by delving into the humdrum of everyday life. In other words, whereas Husserl—or at least the early Husserl—is primarily interested in producing a scientifically rigorous account of the sub jective structures of experience, Heidegger—or at least the early Heidegger—is interest ed in making sense of the existential concerns of a concrete self-in-the-world. As he writes in a series of lectures on phenomenology that he held in the year in which Being and Time was published: “The genuine, actual, though inauthentic understanding of the self takes place in such a way that this self, the self of our thoughtlessly random, common, everyday existence ‘reflects’ itself to itself out of that to which it has given itself over” ( Heidegger 1988: 161). Heidegger’s hermeneutical (p. 239) transformation of Husserlian phenomenal ogy is a turn from an interest in knowledge to an interest in existence. Or as he puts it in another lecture four years earlier: “What hermeneutics is really meant to achieve is not merely taking cognizance of something and having knowledge about it, but rather an ex istential knowing, i.e., a being [ein San ]. It speaks from out of interpretation and for the sake of it” (Heidegger 1999: 14). Our knowledge is the product of interpretation. As such, interpretation is not a choice or an add-on to the phenomenological description of expert Once. Experience is configured through interpretation because we are engaged with that which we experience, and we are engaged with experience because experience matters to us.

In fact, for Heidegger one of the primary problems with Husserlian phenomenology is that it does not pay enough attention to the Effective aspect of experience. It is the affect Dive aspect that reveals interpretation as an inescapable part of experience. We want to make sense of experience because we are affected by what we experience. Experience is structured normatively, and interpretation is our attempt to make sense the world, other people, and ourselves through the norms and values that orient our existence. As seen in the quote above, Heidegger approaches human selfhood in terms of the normative dis tinction between inauthentic and authentic existence. Most people, according to Heideg ger, live their lives through mindless small-talk and ossified habits, and their engagement with the world and other people is severely limited by hearsay, asinine curiosity, and para lazing ambiguity (Heidegger 2010: 161–173). The task for a human being is to disentan gle herself from the web of idle talk and the empty humdrum of everyday life and to strive for an authentic life by trying to make sense of what she actually cares about. We find ourselves thrown into a world that we have not chosen, and we live a life that we have on ly partial control over. Heidegger analyzes this existential condition with the concept of 2 Befindlichkeit. The concept is translated into English as “attunement” to capture the fact that we experience ourselves as Effectively attuned to our existence before our reflective attempt to make sense of ourselves. Heidegger’s use of the original German word, howev er, brings out a more complex understanding of human self-experience. Befindlichkeit, in Heidegger’s existential analysis, has a twofold significance comprising both the physical and the mental aspect of being-in-the world; or rather, it shows that we cannot separate Phenomenology and Hermeneutics those two aspects. Our being-in-the-world, our existence, is saturated with Effective states. We experience ourselves as situated in a particular time and place, while at the same time experiencing ourselves affected by this particular situation through feelings, emotions, and moods (Heidegger 2010: 130–136).

Heidegger’s Being and Time introduces an existential hermeneutics that brings out the in terpretative character of experience with a particular emphasis on the temporal aspect of human existence. Not long after this seminal work, Heidegger shifted his hermeneutical focus from existential analysis to what he considered to be more fundamental ontological investigations of being in general, and selfhood and subjectivity subsided into the back ground of the latter part of his authorship. In fact, Heidegger’s hermeneutical (p. 240) phenomenology does not provide a positive account of what it is to be a human self. The primary strength of Heidegger’s work is not the production of positive accounts of specif ic things, concrete aspects of the world, or solutions to human problems, but rather the Reconstructive criticism of various—scientific, philosophical, and religious—existential ideals of what it means to be a human (Gadamer 2004: 253–254). However, as Heidegger’s most influential student, Gadamer, writes: “What man needs is not just the persistent posing of ultimate questions, but the sense of what is feasible, what is possible, what is correct, here and now. The philosopher, of all people, must, I think, be aware of the tension between what he claims to achieve and the reality in which he finds himself” ( Gadamer 2004: xxxiv).

Heidegger’s Being and Time introduces an existential hermeneutics that brings out the in terpretative character of experience with a particular emphasis on the temporal aspect of human existence. Not long after this seminal work, Heidegger shifted his hermeneutical focus from existential analysis to what he considered to be more fundamental ontological investigations of being in general, and selfhood and subjectivity subsided into the back ground of the latter part of his authorship. In fact, Heidegger’s hermeneutical (p. 240) phenomenology does not provide a positive account of what it is to be a human self. The primary strength of Heidegger’s work is not the production of positive accounts of specif ic things, concrete aspects of the world, or solutions to human problems, but rather the Reconstructive criticism of various—scientific, philosophical, and religious—existential ideals of what it means to be a human (Gadamer 2004: 253–254). However, as Heidegger’s most influential student, Gadamer, writes: “What man needs is not just the persistent posing of ultimate questions, but the sense of what is feasible, what is possible, what is correct, here and now. The philosopher, of all people, must, I think, be aware of the tension between what he claims to achieve and the reality in which he finds himself” ( Gadamer 2004: xxxiv).

Gadamer takes it upon himself to develop Heidegger’s Reconstructive phenomenological hermeneutics into a hermeneutical philosophy more in line with traditional hermeneutics, that is, a hermeneutics aimed at clarifying how the humanities can produce viable sou sons to contemporary problems that are not—or cannot be—addressed by the natural sci Fences. As such, Gadamer’s hermeneutical philosophy is not meant to be a contribution to phenomenology, but it has deep phenomenological roots and provides a philosophical ar ticulation of themes that have become central in contemporary phenomenology (Fugal 2012: 532). History and language are two of the most important themes that Gadamer deals with in his major work from 1960, Truth and Method. The human being exists in and through language, and it is situated in a specific historical tradition. Gadamer’s focus is not subjectivity or selfhood, but the historical and linguistic conditions of human inter pretation: “The focus of subjectivity is a distorting mirror. The self-awareness of the Hindi visual is only a flickering in the closed circuits of historical life. That is why the preju dices of the individual, far more than his judgments, constitute the historical reality of his being” ( Gadamer 2004: 278). We think and talk in languages that we have not chosen, whose words carry a historical significance that influence us in ways that are experien sally opaque. Moreover, we ourselves change over time, and our understanding of the world, other people, and ourselves is therefore never stable. We are constantly faced with the instability of what we understand, and we have to reappropriate our understanding through interpretation. The task of hermeneutics is to overcome this fundamental alien Cation that we live with as historical language users.

Phenomenology and Hermeneutics Gadamer’s work is more explicitly hermeneutical than phenomenological in character, meaning that he is more concerned with the textual than experiential conditions of inter pretation. Nonetheless, his hermeneutic analysis of the historical and linguistic character of human experience, and his argument for the inescapable interpretative character of this experience, has had an immense impact on the subsequent development of hermeneutical phenomenology.

Hermeneutical Phenomenology It is in the work of the French philosopher Paul Ricoeur that we find the most elaborate attempt to combine phenomenology and hermeneutics into a proper hermeneutical phe nomenology. While Gadamer took Heidegger’s Reconstructive hermeneutical phenom nology in a more constructive hermeneutical direction with texts and historical traditions as the analytical core, Ricoeur retains Heidegger’s existential concern with subjectivity and selfhood (p. 241) in Being and Time. Like Gadamer, though, he tries to develop Heidegger’s hermeneutical deconstruction into a constructive philosophy aimed at sol ing concrete existential and societal problems (Ricoeur 2004: 9–10). One of the primary objectives of Ricoeur’s philosophy is to provide an account of personal identity, and it is in working out this account that he combines phenomenology and hermeneutics. Ricoeur’s basic argument is that the two traditions are entangled to the extent that a separation of the two into distinct disciplines will always result in distorting accounts of human expert Once and personal identity. Or, as he puts it in an article dedicated to the interplay of the two philosophical traditions: “On the one hand, hermeneutics is erected on the basis of phenomenology and thus preserves something of the philosophy from which it neverthe less differs: phenomenology remains the unsurpassable presupposition of hermeneutics. On the other hand, phenomenology cannot constitute itself without a hermeneutical pre supposition ” (Ricoeur 2008: 23–24; emphasis in the original). For Ricoeur, phenomenolo gy is not so much a homogeneous theory as a method, and—as it has become obvious throughout the twentieth century—there are many possible theoretical developments of Husserlian phenomenology. Husserl’s insistence on pre-reflective experience and immedi ate self-awareness neglects, Ricoeur argues following Heidegger, the existential aspects of human experience such as the Effective dimension of experience, the question of the will, and the constitutive presence of the other person in human self-awareness. It is, as we have seen, this existential dimension that is one of the main differences between Husserlian phenomenology and hermeneutics. Contrary to the Husserlian argue Bent that subjectivity functions as the constitutive foundation of experience, hermeneu tics, Ricoeur argues, “proposes to make subjectivity the final, and not the first, category of a theory of understanding. Subjectivity must be lost as radical origin if it is to be recon red in a more modest role” ( Ricoeur 2008: 34).

The self is not a stable foundation upon which a person can construct a life, but a restless and fragile sense of being someone and wanting to become someone. The self is therefore an existential problem rather than transcendental or constitutive fact, and this existential challenge affects the subjective structures of experience. The pre-reflective structures of Phenomenology and Hermeneutics experience are not immune to the existential concerns of the experiencing subject nor is the immediate givenness of the world isolated from the personal, historical, or social con text in which it is experienced. This is not to say that one cannot or should not investigate the pre-reflective structures of experience or the immediate givenness of the world. On the contrary, as is obvious from both Husserl’s work and the work of contemporary phe nomenologists, such investigations help us clarify and make sense of fundamental aspects of human experience. And as we shall see, these aspects play a vital role in Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenology. What the hermeneutical perspective makes evident is the interpretative foundation of Husserlian phenomenology, namely, that the focus on the prereflective structures of experience and the immediate givenness of the world is merely one interpretation or use of phenomenology, and this interpretation needs to be couple Dented with an existential interpretation in order to provide a satisfactory account of hu man experience (Ricoeur 2007: 212). As we have seen with Heidegger, this existential in terpretation complements the descriptive focus on experiential features of subjectivity in Husserlian phenomenology with an ontological concern that brings out the problems of existing as a self. One way to put it is that while phenomenology concentrates on the how of human experience, hermeneutics is concerned with what I experience and why I expert Once it in the way that I do. Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenology is an attempt to bring into play all three dimensions in the (p. 242) analysis of human experience. The in sistence on the existential grounding of experience means that the problem of personal identity is of particular interest to Ricoeur’s combination of phenomenology and hermeneutics.

Identity is a problem that the self struggles with throughout her life. Human experience involves an immediate sense of self, that is, a pre-reflective sense of Fineness, owner ship, and agency. Or as a prominent contemporary phenomenologist argues, selfhood is a constitutive part of experience in the sense “that there is necessarily something it is like for the subject to have or live through the experiences” ( Zahavi 2014: 8). Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenology uses this sense of self as the experiential foundation of be ing human. Different from most phenomenological accounts of selfhood, though, Ricoeur argues that we cannot provide a satisfactory account of human selfhood without taking into account the problem of identity. The existential foundation provided by the immedi ate sense of self is inherently fragile because with the experience of being a self comes al so the experience of wanting to be a (particular kind of) person. The hermeneutical Bevel opment of phenomenology is an attempt to explicate and make sense of this conative as Sect of experience in terms of what he calls our “effort to exist,” “will to exist,” or “orig Bating affirmation” ( Ricoeur 1977: 46; Ricoeur 1987: 137). This means that, for Ricoeur, we cannot understand what it is to be a self without taking into account the desire or ef fort to be a particular person. Selfhood, in other words, is entangled with personhood, and our experience of the world, other people, and ourselves is structured and constantly informed by our care about who we are, who we were, and who we will be.

Identity is a problem that the self struggles with throughout her life. Human experience involves an immediate sense of self, that is, a pre-reflective sense of Fineness, owner ship, and agency. Or as a prominent contemporary phenomenologist argues, selfhood is a constitutive part of experience in the sense “that there is necessarily something it is like for the subject to have or live through the experiences” ( Zahavi 2014: 8). Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenology uses this sense of self as the experiential foundation of be ing human. Different from most phenomenological accounts of selfhood, though, Ricoeur argues that we cannot provide a satisfactory account of human selfhood without taking into account the problem of identity. The existential foundation provided by the immedi ate sense of self is inherently fragile because with the experience of being a self comes al so the experience of wanting to be a (particular kind of) person. The hermeneutical Bevel opment of phenomenology is an attempt to explicate and make sense of this conative as Sect of experience in terms of what he calls our “effort to exist,” “will to exist,” or “orig Bating affirmation” ( Ricoeur 1977: 46; Ricoeur 1987: 137). This means that, for Ricoeur, we cannot understand what it is to be a self without taking into account the desire or ef fort to be a particular person. Selfhood, in other words, is entangled with personhood, and our experience of the world, other people, and ourselves is structured and constantly informed by our care about who we are, who we were, and who we will be.

There are no stable or readily identifiable answers to the question of who we are. We can only hope to make sense of our identity through a long detour of interpretations. Interpret Cation is here understood not exclusively as interpretation of texts, traditions, or cultural Phenomenology and Hermeneutics artifacts, but also phenomenological and biological interpretations of my body, and ethic cal interpretations of my relationship with the other person (to mention some of the pri Cary themes of Ricoeur’s philosophy). As Ricoeur puts it succinctly: “hermeneutics proves to be a philosophy of detours” ( Ricoeur 1992: 17). Inspired by Gadamer’s work with textual hermeneutics, Ricoeur goes on to argue that we can indeed use texts and lit erasure as an exercise in self-understanding and as a model for making sense of personal identity. To read a text is to be exposed to a world that is not of our own making, and as such to be confronted with heteronomous perspectives on our conception of the world. In this way, we become distanced from ourselves through reading, and yet we also come to know ourselves through the text: “What would we know of love and hate, of moral feel Dings, and, in general, of all that we call the self if these had not been brought to language and articulated by literature?” ( Ricoeur 2008: 84). At work in reading is a dialectics of distance and appropriation that, according to Ricoeur, articulates and clarifies the hermeneutical insistence on the fictional character of selfhood: [J]ust as the world of the text is real only insofar as it is imaginary, so too it must be said that the subjectivity of the reader comes to itself only insofar as it is placed in suspense, unrealized, potentialized. In other words, if fiction is a fund mental dimension of the reference of the text, it is no less a fundamental dime ion of the subjectivity of the reader. As a reader I find myself only by losing my self. Reading introduces me into imaginative variations of the ego. The metamor phosis of the world in play is also the playful metamorphosis of the ego.

(Ricoeur 2008: 84–85)

(p. 243) This playful or fictional character of the self that is articulated through reading discloses the fragile foundation of human identity. We are not simply what we are in terms of biology, culture, memories, or even in terms of our self-understanding. We need to appropriate our identity through a constant interpretative effort. This is the primary argument of the hermeneutical perspective on personal identity.

This hermeneutical perspective is, however, combined with important phenomenological arguments. Ricoeur’s insistence on the long hermeneutical detour over the what and the why of the identity of a person, that is, the interpretative explanation of a person’s identi ty, is accompanied by his argument that if we want to produce a satisfactory account of personal identity we also need to take into account the how of a person’s identity, that is, the experience of being this particular person. Our interpretations need to be rooted in and acknowledge the explanatory importance of experience. This means that we have to take seriously the intentionality of experience and the pre-reflective meaning of expert Once if we want to make sense of what it means to be a particular person. Language is, as we have seen, fundamental to our interpretation of experience. Nevertheless, Ricoeur’s hermeneutical phenomenology shares with Husserlian phenomenology the conviction that language is subordinated to experience, and that linguistic meaning therefore has a de rivative character (Ricoeur 2008: 38–40). The point is that identity is not merely a reflex Dive task, but a problem that the person is constantly confronted with in her pre-reflective Phenomenology and Hermeneutics experience of the world, other people, and herself. We are the product of our past and of the culture in which we live, but our identity as persons depends on more than merely the conglomeration of biological development, cultural norms, habit, or memories. In the same way, although our ambitions, our goals, and our ideas about and hopes for the fu Cure shape who we are, our identity is also influenced by how we feel, think, and act in the concrete present. Moreover, our identity is deeply affected by how other people see and understand us, and our self-understanding is entangled with interpreting other people’s understanding of us. And yet, we are more than what we are in the eyes of other people. The point is that a hermeneutical account of personal identity must take seriously the experience of being the person that I am.

By way of conclusion, I will argue that this interplay of immediate experiential givenness and reflective appropriation makes hermeneutical phenomenology an important tool for phenomenological psychopathology.

Hermeneutical Phenomenology and Phenom # nological Psychopathology Mental suffering comes in innumerable shapes and forms, and to describe and explain mental pain is challenging because of the indeterminate character of human self-expert Once. The cause of a person’s suffering may be evident (e.g. the loss of a loved one), but the experiential character of that suffering indeterminate. And, vice versa, the experience of suffering can be excruciatingly clear while the cause remains obscure. To make sense of suffering we need to examine both the experiential and explanatory aspect of suffering —that is, we have to deal with the how, the why, and the what of the experience of suffer ing. A person who goes through a prolonged episode of suffering is concerned with how she feels, what she feels, and (p. 244) why she feels the way she does. The questions that accompany severe mental suffering often provoke a sense of losing or having lost oneself. The lack of an obvious cause of suffering or the indeterminate character of that suffering foregrounds a person’s sense of identity. Not being able to point to an explicit cause or not being able to make sense of the meaning of one’s feelings brings out the fragility of a person’s sense of self. Why do I feel the way I do? Is my reaction normal? Am I to blame for what is happening to me? Is it because of something that I have done or because I am actually not who I think I am? These questions do not arise with the same existential ur ency when it comes to a broken leg or kidney disease (although one’s sense of identity is of course also always affected by a somatic illness; see Waller 2005 ). The person’s identi ty is more radically at stake in mental illness due to the lack of determinate experiential givenness or an explicit cause (e.g. the pain of hitting one’s toe or the feeling of sadness because of a disparaging remark).

There is important work in phenomenological psychopathology on the role of selfhood in mental illness among which the self-disorder hypothesis of schizophrenia is arguably the most influential. Phenomenological psychopathology primarily focuses on disturbances of the pre-reflex Phenomenology and Hermeneutics Dive structures of self-awareness such as temporality, embodiment, sense of ownership, and agency. Hermeneutical phenomenology builds on and develops this phenomenology cal work with a clarification of the reflective aspects of these disturbances of our implicit sense of self. The argument is that we cannot hope to provide a satisfactory account of the disturbed sense of self without an account of personhood. I am a self who is also a person, and to be a person is to be an embodied, social, and rational being who has to make sense of these aspects of her identity. In this sense, the notion of personhood is broader than the notion of selfhood as it is typically used in phenomenological psychopathology, involving the biological, social, and ethical aspects of human suffering. Moreover, the notion brings out the conative aspects of human identity, that is, the fact that we are not merely the self that we experience ourselves to be. We want to be a particular kind of self, and we have ambitions, dreams, and hopes for the fu Cure that affect our experience of suffering.

The experience of being a self involves, as we have seen, a need to make sense of expert Once, and in particular to make sense of who we are, what we are, and why we feel, think, and behave the way we do. These questions concern not merely the experiential aspects of personal identity, but also the biological, social, and ethical aspects of what it means to be a person, and as such they go beyond the scope of a strictly phenomenological account of selfhood. To make sense of a person’s suffering it is not sufficient to clarify the expert entail structures and dynamics of self-awareness. We also need to take into account the biological and sociocultural factors that shape—and in some cases are part of the cause of —my suffering, and the ethical considerations that inform and orient my thinking about how to live with my suffering. A person is not merely who she experiences herself to be, and her mental illness is more complex than her experience of it. This is of course a riv ial observation. What is not trivial, though, is how to make sense of this complexity of mental illness. Phenomenological psychopathology provides us with an explanation of the experience of suffering, but we need other approaches to clarify and make sense of the “phenomenologically blind” aspects of a mental illness. Hermeneutical phenomenology provides an account that allows us to integrate a phenomenological approach with other approaches such as biological, sociological, and ethical approaches to mental illness. This account provides the philosophical foundation for a dialectical model of mental illness that understands the patient as an autonomous person who (p. 245) is constantly trying to make sense her own suffering (Jasper 1997: 414–424; Stanghellini and Rosfort 2015a, 2015b). This model is person-centered in the sense that understands personal identity as a critical part of mental illness. To fully understand a person’s experience of and life with a mental illness, we need to acknowledge that her sense of identity is involved in her mental suffering. As we saw in the first section, hermeneutics works with a fragile con Dept of selfhood. The experience of being a self is always accompanied by an experience of not being who I am, that is, an experience of otherness. This otherness constantly dis Burbs my sense of identity, and to live with this fragile sense of self I need to acknowledge that I am more than my sense of self. I am also the otherness that constitutes my identity as the person I am (my body, the world, and other people). To exist as a person is to con scantly interpret and appropriate this otherness as part of the person that I am. Dive structures of self-awareness such as temporality, embodiment, sense of ownership, and agency. Hermeneutical phenomenology builds on and develops this phenomenology cal work with a clarification of the reflective aspects of these disturbances of our implicit sense of self. The argument is that we cannot hope to provide a satisfactory account of the disturbed sense of self without an account of personhood. I am a self who is also a person, and to be a person is to be an embodied, social, and rational being who has to make sense of these aspects of her identity. In this sense, the notion of personhood is broader than the notion of selfhood as it is typically used in phenomenological psychopathology, involving the biological, social, and ethical aspects of human suffering. Moreover, the notion brings out the conative aspects of human identity, that is, the fact that we are not merely the self that we experience ourselves to be. We want to be a particular kind of self, and we have ambitions, dreams, and hopes for the fu Cure that affect our experience of suffering.

The experience of being a self involves, as we have seen, a need to make sense of expert Once, and in particular to make sense of who we are, what we are, and why we feel, think, and behave the way we do. These questions concern not merely the experiential aspects of personal identity, but also the biological, social, and ethical aspects of what it means to be a person, and as such they go beyond the scope of a strictly phenomenological account of selfhood. To make sense of a person’s suffering it is not sufficient to clarify the expert entail structures and dynamics of self-awareness. We also need to take into account the biological and sociocultural factors that shape—and in some cases are part of the cause of —my suffering, and the ethical considerations that inform and orient my thinking about how to live with my suffering. A person is not merely who she experiences herself to be, and her mental illness is more complex than her experience of it. This is of course a riv ial observation. What is not trivial, though, is how to make sense of this complexity of mental illness. Phenomenological psychopathology provides us with an explanation of the experience of suffering, but we need other approaches to clarify and make sense of the “phenomenologically blind” aspects of a mental illness. Hermeneutical phenomenology provides an account that allows us to integrate a phenomenological approach with other approaches such as biological, sociological, and ethical approaches to mental illness. This account provides the philosophical foundation for a dialectical model of mental illness that understands the patient as an autonomous person who (p. 245) is constantly trying to make sense her own suffering (Jasper 1997: 414–424; Stanghellini and Rosfort 2015a, 2015b). This model is person-centered in the sense that understands personal identity as a critical part of mental illness. To fully understand a person’s experience of and life with a mental illness, we need to acknowledge that her sense of identity is involved in her mental suffering. As we saw in the first section, hermeneutics works with a fragile con Dept of selfhood. The experience of being a self is always accompanied by an experience of not being who I am, that is, an experience of otherness. This otherness constantly dis Burbs my sense of identity, and to live with this fragile sense of self I need to acknowledge that I am more than my sense of self. I am also the otherness that constitutes my identity as the person I am (my body, the world, and other people). To exist as a person is to con scantly interpret and appropriate this otherness as part of the person that I am.

Phenomenology and Hermeneutics The strength of hermeneutical phenomenology lies in providing methods (most influen sally, but not exclusively, narrative theories) to articulate these various aspects of person al identity through a phenomenological approach. The argument is that we cannot make sense of personal identity without articulating and interpreting the complexity of our ex perience of identity. This complexity grows out of experience, so to speak, in the form of the questions that we ask about who we are, what we are, what we have done, and what we should do. Hermeneutics allows us to deal with this complexity rather than being par alyzed by it. The contribution of hermeneutical phenomenology to phenomenological psy chopathology is to be found precisely here. The dialectical model of mental illness under stands that the biological, cultural, and ethical aspects of mental illness are not merely “add-ons” to a primary or foundational phenomenological account of selfhood, but are critical for our approach to and understanding of the suffering person. The person is both a patient and an agent in her experience of her mental illness. That is to say, that her suf Bering is her individual suffering because she always does something with her suffering, and yet she suffers from the otherness of her suffering in the sense that there are biology cal, social, and ethical aspects of her suffering that are out of her control. This dialectics of selfhood and otherness is at the heart of the hermeneutical approach to the patient as autonomous person who tries to make sense of herself in her experience of a mental ill Bess. One of the major strengths of this account is that it allows us to see that a phenom nological approach to psychopathology is not necessarily in conflict with a biological, so Dial, or ethical account. A hermeneutical development of phenomenological psychopathol ogy is, in this sense, a theoretical foundation for a constructive interdisciplinary dialogue with other approaches to mental illness. PAGE_BREAK (p. 247) Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R. (2015b). “The Patient as an Autonomous Person: Hermeneutical Phenomenology as a Resource for an Ethics for Psychiatrists.” In John Z. Saddler, K. W. M. Fulford, and Weirdie van Stamen (eating disorders.), The Oxford Handbook of Psych attic Ethics, pp. 319–335. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Taylor C.. “Self-interpreting Animals.” In C. Taylor, Human Agency and Language: Philosophical Papers 1, pp. 45–76. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Waller T.. “The Place of Pain in Life.” Philosophy 80: 385–393.

Zahavi D.. Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Zahavi D.. Self and Other: Exploring Subjectivity, Empathy, and Shame. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Zahavi D.. “Consciousness, Self-Consciousness, Selfhood: A Reply to some Critics.” Review of Philosophy and Psychology. Online first: doi: 10.1007/s13164-018-0403-6 Notes: 1 ( ) The English version translates “l’affirmation serine: je sews” with “the serene Gasser son I am.” I have chosen to maintain the noun “affirmation” because, in Ricoeur’s philos ophy, this specific noun functions as a technical concept with a fundamental ontological significance. The concept of “affirmation” or “originating affirmation” is meant to capture the basic affirmative character of human existence. Inspired by Spinoza’s concept of conatus that designates a general will-to-live, Ricoeur argues that to exist is to want to ex ist: “Under the pressure of the negative, of negative experiences, we must re-achieve a notion of being which is act rather than form, living affirmation, the power of existing and of making exist’ (2007b: 328; see also Stanghellini and Rosfort 2013: 61, 192–198). In this sense, the notion of affirmation functions as one aspect of the basic dialectical structure of the human being, where the other is the inescapable negation that comes with existing Phenomenology and Hermeneutics as a finite being (e.g. sickness, grief, fatigue, frustration, depression): “I do not think man directly, but I think him through composition, as the “mixture” of originating affirmation and existential negation. Man is the Joy of Yes in the sadness of the finite” ( Ricoeur 1987: 140).

2 ( ) “Befindlichkeit ” is notoriously difficult to translate into English. There are a variety of translations in use today (e.g. “affectedness,” “disposedness,” “sofindingness”). The ini ital translation was “state-of-mind”. This translation is unfortunate, though, because it seems to work with a distinction between internal, psychological exp riences and external experiences of the world that Heidegger’s works actually aims to un ermine. The most common translation today is “attunement”.

René Rosfort The Søren Kierkegaard Research Center, University of Copenhagen Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology # Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology Louis A. Sass and Adam Fishman The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Aug 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter reviews and evaluates the criticisms that phenomenological thinkers have made of introspection and introspectionism, as well as the attempts phenomenologists have made to distinguish themselves from introspectionists. Such criticisms and distinct sons concern the epoché, the eidetic reduction, and the intentional structure and ran scendental status of subjectivity. We concentrate on three examples of “introspection”: the Cornell school of Kitchener and the German Würzburg School, both from the early twentieth century, as well as a contemporary group of French researchers who seek the “explicitation” of subjectivity. Some differences between the perspectives of Husserl and those of Heidegger and Merleau-Monty are considered. We end by considering phenom nological psychopathology in light of these issues. We argue that the reasons for criticize ing “introspection,” and distinguishing it from true “phenomenology,” may seem less co gent or apt when certain versions of “introspection” are considered, and also when phe nomenological psychopathology is included under the rubric of “phenomenology.”

Keywords: introspection, intentionality, epoché, eidetic reduction, explicitation, Kitchener, Würzburg, Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-Monty # Introduction “INTROSPECTION” and “phenomenology” refer to the two most prominent scientific or philosophical programs or traditions—or sets of programs or traditions—to study subject tivity: to describe, from within, the “what-it-is-like” of human consciousness or expert Once. The relationship between the approaches falling under these rubrics is exceptional ly difficult to define, however. Outsiders, especially hostile ones, but also some insiders, tend to treat them as equivalent—with phenomenological method sometimes simply as Fumed to be a form of “introspection,” and “introspection” just understood to mean a fo using on the “phenomenology” or subjective character of mental life. The approaches do share some common ancestry, stretching back at least to Descartes and Kant and include Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology ing more recent thinkers about consciousness or subjectivity such as Brentano, Bergson, 1 and William James.

The views of insiders to the two sets of programs or traditions are extremely divergent, however. They range from the claim that the relevant methods can be complementary or even overlapping to the point of equivalence, to the insistence, by Edmund Husserl and some of his followers, that to describe phenomenology as a form of introspection is “pre posterous” ( Zahavi 2011: 16). There is, in fact, a strong tradition within phenomenology (summarized later) of criticizing introspection or introspectionism, and seeking to define phenomenology in a way that would sharply dissociate it from the supposed weaknesses or errors of introspection. The phenomenological arguments against “introspection” can sound pertinent and powerful, yet may also seem, at other moments, somewhat over drawn or even inaccurate. The reasons for these wavering reactions make some sense once one recognizes the (p. 249) ambiguities inherent in both notions; for, in fact, there are several ways of understanding each of these key terms. It seems that “introspect son”—perhaps “phenomenology” as well—is a kind of “floating signified,” and that any ad equate comparison of the two must take these ambiguities into account.

A thorough treatment of this complex topic would require a great many pages. Our state gy in this chapter will be to focus on criticisms of introspection by members of the phe nomenological tradition. We will be interested in the nature and validity of these critic isms, but also in the extent to which they really do differentiate between the two pro grams or traditions. We will concentrate on three examples of “introspection”: the Cornell school of E. B. Kitchener and the German Würzburg School, both from the early twentieth century, as well as a contemporary group of French researchers who seek the “explicit son” of consciousness or subjectivity. Some differences between the perspectives of Husserl, phenomenology’s founder, and those of Heidegger and Merleau-Monty will be considered. We will end by considering phenomenological psychopathology in light of these issues. As we shall see, the reasons for criticizing “introspection,” and distinguish ing it from true “phenomenology,” may seem less cogent or apt when one considers cer Cain versions of “introspection,” and when one includes phenomenological psychopatholo gy under the rubric of “phenomenology.”

Phenomenological Criticisms of Introspection The phenomenological attack on “introspection” can be traced back to Husserl himself, who clearly associated it with the dreaded “psychologist” that he himself had espoused in his earliest writings, but rejected vigorously after some decisive criticism from the 2 philosopher Free. Husserl’s arguments have been echoed by Merleau-Monty, Gurwitsch, and some contemporary Husserlians.

Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology Epoché Phenomenologists have argued that introspection suffers from a failure to carry out the “bracketing” or epoché that is the first, largely negative, move in any phenomenological investigation. Epoché is an act of “abstention” or putting into parentheses (neither belie ing nor denying, nor even doubting) of all common-sense assumptions (of the “natural at titude”) as well as of theoretical claims about experience, mind, or the world, in order to make way for a presuppositionless and unprejudiced investigation of what actually ap pears in our conscious experience (Merleau-Monty 1945: 86). Introspectionists are critic Sized for relying (p. 250) on “predetermined categories,” categories decided upon before the investigation and therefore imposed upon experience rather than elicited from it (Overgaard et al. 2008: 110).

Intentionality

A second key criticism is the claim that introspectionists fail to transcend a misleading subject/object distinction that contradicts the objector world-directed nature of actual subjective life. The very term “introspection,” it is said, implies a deplorable “Cartesian ism”: the assumption that subjectivity is some sort of inward or inner object or quasi-ob Sect (“intro...”) that could be inspected (“... section”) at a kind of remove ( Zahavi 3 2011). It is noted that Husserl, by contrast, followed Brentano in considering conscious Bess to be fundamentally “intentional” or object-directed. This means that the subjectivity to which one returns in phenomenological reduction (the Latin “ reducer ” means to with draw or lead back to) must not be conceived as a “mysterious inner world” or “state of consciousness” to be grasped through “a very peculiar kind of act—‘inner perception’ or introspection” ( Merleau-Monty 1945: 58). Rather, it is a veritable streamingoutward that we simply are, and that is simply inconceivable (and indescribable) apart from the objects toward which it aims.

Transcendental

A third phenomenological criticism is the claim that introspectionists adopt a “natural ism” regarding consciousness, thereby failing to recognize the transcendental or, we might say, truly constituting nature of subjectivity (Zahavi 2011: 16f.). Consciousness is not a mere “sector of being” that happens to involve “inner events” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 59–61) yet can be studied like the objects of physics, chemistry, or biology. Conscious Bess, writes Merleau-Monty, needs to be understood as “a totality with no equivalent at all among the things of nature” (1945: 58) since it is the very domain within which both meaning and the world itself actually come into being. “Acts of consciousness” therefore require transcendental clarification; they constitute a “privileged realm” and need to be considered “with regard to their... presentational function”—as that “ through ” which “objects, processes, events, and occurrences... display themselves” ( Merleau-Monty 1945: 90; Gurwitsch 1966: 90).

Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology Merleau-Monty brings the intentionality and transcendental insights together in these lap diary lines on subjectivity: “The interior and the exterior are inseparable. The world is en Direly on the inside, and I am entirely outside of myself” (1945: 469). This is more or less what Husserl meant when he spoke, in his Cartesian Meditations, of “transcendence [a going beyond] within immanence” ( Moran and Cohen 2012: 162). Phenomenology, he might have said, is not a matter of looking at the within; rather, it is a matter of looking at the world from within—but, of course, with a heightened awareness of precisely this fromness.

(p. 251) Eidetic Intuition A fourth way of distinguishing introspection from phenomenology is to note that intro section fails to seek “eidetic intuition” ( Wesenschau ) through “eidetic reduction,” which is meant to be the key source of generalization in Husserlian phenomenology. Unlike more standard forms of generalization or abstraction, this phenomenological “intuition of essences” is not supposed to be reliant on fallible empirical observation, for example, on a gathering of subjective reports. Indeed it is “not concerned with matters of fact or xis Fence, but [with] the necessary and essential... [with] essences of a universal charac ter” (Moran and Cohen 2012: 92): “Prior to knowledge of the Tactical world,” wrote Husserl, “there is universal knowledge of those essential possibilities without which no world whatever, and this includes the Tactical world as well, can be thought of as exist ing” (Husserl 1997: 487).

The eidetic reduction is supposedly grounded in something whose universality and truth can be recognized with an intuitive (viz. immediately perceived) certitude somewhat akin to the truth of logic and mathematics. It involves “regaining” the sense of things or events that, though “not thematized,” were always present “in our spontaneous, unreflective experience” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 55). It depends on a kind of imaginative variation whereby one discovers, with clarity and confidence, something one had already known in some more obscure, perhaps pre-reflective way.

An example of eidetic intuition is the controlled process whereby phenomenological re Election discerns the essence of a particular mode or element of experience through acts of controlled imaginative variation—so that, for example, by pure reflection on, and mag native variation of, one’s own experiences (or memories thereof), one identifies the in variants that make a perception a perception, rather than an act of remembering, imagine ing, or dreaming. Many Husserlians (but not all phenomenologists, as we shall see later ) consider the eidetic reduction (speaking of essences) an essential feature of any investigation of subjectivity that is truly “phenomenological.”

Resumé

We have described four criticisms, each linked to a core notion definitive of phenomenolo gy, at least in its Husserlian form. Two of these criticisms—intentionality and the ran scendental dimension—pertain to how subjectivity itself is conceived. The other two— Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology bracketing and the eidetic reduction—concern the appropriate method for studying subjectivity.

Phenomenological Criticisms Applied to Class # cal Introspectionists Kitchener Both the absence of bracketing and the neglect of “intentionality” seem readily apparent in the introspection advocated by the early twentieth-century Cornell psychologist E. B. (p. 252) Kitchener—a British transplant and former pupil of Wilhelm Wundt who is often treated as the quintessential example of an introspectionist. Kitchener’s naturalism is ap parent in his invoking of chemistry and physics as models for the study of subjective ex perience (Beenfeldt 2013: 34; Boring 1953: 173) and in lines such as these: “... the intro spective methods thus do us the same service in psychologising that ‘observation and ex pediment’ do in natural science”; its limitations are “of the same sort as the ‘limitations’ of a microscope or a camera” ( Kitchener 1912: 508, 498). As we shall see, rather than bracketing all presuppositions, Kitchener seems to have accepted the assumption—typical of the empiricist and associationist traditions, and of sense-data theorists—that “con sciousness is a mosaic of sensory data and images derived from these data,” as in Hume’s account of “impressions” and “ideas” ( Gurwitsch 1966: 159).

Central to Kitchener’s approach was the attempt to avoid what he termed the “stimulus error” or the “meaning error.” These refer to reports of experience that describe the act al worldly object, naively perceived, or else the experienced meaning, naively registered, rather than truly describing the associated and underlying “impression,” “sensation,” “mental process,” or “mental material itself”. Kitchener followed Wundt in distinguishing between “mediate” and “immediate” experience. He believed that psycho ogy, through “hard introspective labor,” should focus on the latter, which he equated with “experience dependent on an experiencing person [or] organism” ( Heidbreder 1933: 123, 126, 129).

In his vision of perception, Kitchener resembled a sense-data theorist who believes that what one truly sees, in visual perception, is not the external stimulus —say, a table or a tomato on a plate—but the sensation or “immediate experience [of] color and brightness and spatial pattern” ( Heidbreder 1933: 129): for example, a “red patch of a round and somewhat bulgy shape, standing out from a background of other color-patches [in a] field of color [that is] directly present to my consciousness” ( Price 1932: 3, quoted in Pepper 1942: 26). This conflicts with the emphasis on intentionality put forward in the phenom nological tradition: “To say that I am... oriented toward sensations is all just pure tho ry,” wrote Martin Heidegger (1982: 63). “Perception is directed toward the extant being itself...”

Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology Regarding the experience of meaning in thinking and understanding, Kitchener stressed the role of specific imagery —which itself is quasi-sensory, and ultimately derived from sensations.

It might seem natural to assume that one’s experience of the meaning of an abstract con Dept would itself occur in some kind of highly abstract medium. But according to Kitchen er, introspection, properly conducted, shows that the experience of the meaning even of highly abstract concepts or notions is always actually mediated by concrete, sensory, even quasi-physicalistic images. “All the [introspectionist] reports,” he wrote, “show the same features: visual images, pictorial or symbolic; internal speech; kinaesthetic images; or Manic sensations. Nowhere a sign of the imageless component!” ( Kitchener 1910: 516). A clear example comes from one trained introspector who investigated his own experience of the meaning of “meaning” itself (obviously a highly abstract concept), and “disco red” this notion to be associated, at least in his consciousness, with something very con Crete: namely, the image of “the blue-Frey tip of a kind of scoop, which has a bit of yellow above it (presumably a part of the handle), and which is just digging into a dark mass of what appears to be plastic material” ( Kitchener 1910: 519, discussed in Sass 1994: 90).

According to one historian of psychology, Kitchener’s method of so-called “introspection” actually consisted of “a Byzantine and heavily theory-laden procedure of ‘psychological (p. 253) analysis’ or regimented ‘analytic attention’ designed to generate data confirming a set of assumptions regarding mental ontology taken over from British associationism [which is closely allied with empiricism and sense-data theory], while at the same time shielding those assumptions from disconfirming evidence” ( Beenfeldt 2013: 67).

Instances such as the above (e.g. the “blue-Frey tip”) also seem to illustrate the potential ly misleading effect that the act or attitude of intense self-observation can have, as noted by various general critics of introspection who warn of a misleading potential in what may amount to a kind of alienating and reifying stare (Sass 2017: chapter 7). It is note worthy that reports by such psychological investigators as Kitchener, or by contemporary subjects asked to adopt his version of introspective technique, can display close parallels with the experiences of psychiatric patients who manifest in tense and dysfunctional forms of self-consciousness—of alienating “hyperreflexivity.” In accord with this orientation or stance, some patients with schizophrenia or depersonalize son disorder may come to lose the sense of being grounded in an active and coherent subject position, while generating subjective phenomena (neither fully perceptual nor ful ly imaginary) with a quality aptly characterized as “phantom concreteness” ( Ling 1965; Sass et al. 2013; Sass 2017: chapter 7).

The Würzburg School The phenomenological criticisms seem to apply less clearly, however, to the introspectors of the Würzburg School—who included Oswald Külpe, Karl Büher, and Narziss Caspar Ach. In the early twentieth century, the famous “imageless-thought controversy” pitted the Würzburgers against the Titchenerian introspectionists. The controversy turned on Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology the Würzburger claim that unbiased introspection actually revealed elements and acts of consciousness, including “dispositions of consciousness” and “determining tendencies” that dissociative identity disorder not, in fact, contain any of the sensory or image-like qualities that the Kitchener ian sensationists seemed to find (or to project?) wherever they observed.

At a certain point the Würzburg investigators, who were influenced by Brentano’s “act psychology” approach, had begun to look not for the “abstract sensory elements to which experience was to be reduced” but for “the subjective acts which make experience of var Nous kinds possible” ( Danziger 1980: 255). The Würzburgers may well have continued to view these acts of consciousness themselves in overly object-like ways, tending to treat them as additional items in the inventory of an inner life conceived as being a “little tag end of the world” ( Husserl 1960: 24)—as some phenomenologists might wish to claim. However, the Wurzbürger attitude toward the nature of these “acts” does seem to have been more open, and their bracketing more thorough, than that of the Titchenerians. Fur her, these latter points should be considered in light of two (closely related) facts: 1) that the truly transcendental nature of consciousness is difficult and perhaps impossible to capture fully in human language or thought, and 2) that bracketing or educ son can, in any case, never be absolute or complete: indeed, “The most important lesson of the reduction is the impossibility of a complete reduction,” as Merleau-Monty put it in a famous line from his Phenomenology of Perception (1945: xxvii).

It may well be that the Würzburgers dissociative identity disorder not sufficiently appreciate the truly constituting nature of consciousness—its status as that which brings the experiential universe itself into manifestation. But as we have seen, they dissociative identity disorder shift the focus from object-like contents (p. 254) of awareness (understood almost as inner “things,” subsisting within the contain er of consciousness) by emphasizing the psychological acts that make awareness possible. And they dissociative identity disorder define mental processes in terms of their actual lived objects or meanings. All this suggests some implicit—if not, perhaps, sufficiently theorized or emphasized—ap preciation of the need for bracketing, and also of the intentional and perhaps even the transcendental nature of consciousness or mind.

Phenomenological Criticisms Applied to Con # temporary Introspectionists Contemporary “Introspectionists”

If we turn to contemporary schools, the distinction between “phenomenology” and “intro section” becomes still harder to draw.

One common feature of contemporary introspectionists is a commitment to avoiding any imposition of theoretical as well as everyday prejudices onto lived experience—which, of course, is equivalent to advocating bracketing or epoché. They all instruct subjects “not to employ implicit or explicit theories about consciousness prior to the experiment” ( Overgaard et al. 2008: 116). This is true of Hurlburt’s Direct Expert Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology Once Sampling method, of the so-called “New Introspectionists”, and of a third, largely French group of investigators on whom we will now focus. These latter offer a particularly sophisticated meditation on a possible methodology for intro section. Since they term their method “explicitation,” we refer to them as the “explicit Zionists.”

“Psycho-Phenomenological Introspection”

Though strongly influenced by the biologist and student of Buddhism, Francisco Varela, who dubbed his own approach “neurophenomenology,” Pierre Vermersch, Michel Bitbol, and Claire Petitmengin often use the word “introspection” to describe their own ap roach. In a phrase that throws their intellectual hybridity into relief, Vermersch refers to their method as “psycho-phenomenological introspection” (2009: 25). None of the explicit tationists is entirely satisfied with the term “introspection,” however—some are even tempted to reject it (Petitmengin and Bitbol 2009: 379). But as Vermersch points out, virtually all the possible semantic alternatives—including “reflection,” “immanent view,” and “inner viewing” (all of which have been used by Husserl himself, e.g. 1977: 19– 20)— also rely on metaphors, often similar ones, that can be equally misleading.

As the phrase “psycho-phenomenological introspection” suggests, explicitation incorpo rates phenomenological insights and was expressly designed to avoid the criticisms di Erected at classical introspectionism (Bitbol and Petitmengin 2013: 273). The proposed method includes the three moves sometimes identified as crucial in a phenomenological study: epoché, focused description, and intersubjective corroboration.

(p. 255) The explicitation interview attempts to bring the interviewee into more direct con tact with their experience—not only by resisting the infiltration of prejudices but also (more originally) by encouraging a re-inhabiting of the original experience at issue by adopting an “evocation position,” a state of trance-like receptivity (cf. Laurel 2009: 64). This is achieved by having the interviewee describe a specified moment of experience in concrete terms, by focusing the interviewee initially on the Censorial surround of the episode in question, and sometimes by having the interviewee re-enact physical gestures performed during the moment described. The interviewer may mirror the interviewee’s gestures and repeat their phrases in order to guide and deepen their at Mention to the particulars of the experience. The goal is to move attention “from the nar row content to the complete act of consciousness,” which, according to Bitbol and Pest mengin (2013: 273), is “tantamount to performing the phenomenological reduction.”

The explicitationists thus speak of seeking “descent to close contact with the very flesh of [one’s] experience (and away from abstraction)”. Only after this “descent” is the expert enter meant to undertake what they describe as “an ascent towards general concepts and structures” ( Bitbol and Petitmengin 2013: 273). And this ascent, in turn, is done while attempting to bracket theoretical and common-sense assumptions as much as poss Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology ble, thereby adopting a “bottom-up” approach that is designed to ensure “high fidelity” to concrete experience.

The explicitationists have been criticized by a Husserlian phenomenologist for adopting the term “introspection,” since this term seems to endorse, at least tacitly, “the idea that consciousness is inside the head and the world outside” ( Zahavi 2011: 17)—an idea that would supposedly neglect the fundamental intentionality of conscious existence. But the explicitationists deny that they are “diverting” attention from external objects “toward an inner world.” Actually, they claim, their methods of evocation and exploration tend to weaken rather than reinforce the distinction between “internal” and “external,” bringing the introspecting individual more in touch with the “permeable” nature of the “separa son” sometimes “perceived between an inner and an outer world” (Petitmengin and Bit bol 2009: 379).

It has been suggested, as well, that the explicitationists risk treating consciousness as a “mere sector of being,” and thereby neglecting, presumably, its transcendental status as the condition for the appearance of the world (Zahavi 2011: 17). It is difficult, however, to see just how this criticism would have any special application to the explicitationist ap roach—as opposed to being taken to apply, perhaps on principle, to just about any attempt to describe the actual lived experiences of particular individuals (and this would 4 include phenomenological psychopathology; see later). Such a criticism would, in any case, need to be considered in light of Merleau-Monty’s claim that “the transcendental at titude is already implied in (p. 256) the psychologist’s descriptions, so long as they are faithful descriptions” (1945: 60)—for this suggests that proper consideration of actual subjective life (an, in part, empirical project) will, when properly conducted, naturally lead one to acknowledge the intentional and constituting dimensions of consciousness.

The Snottiness of the introspection/phenomenology relationship becomes even more ap parent if we consider, in concluding, two forms of diversity within phenomenology: 1) dif Bering views regarding the phenomenological project itself, especially its methodology; and 2) the distinction between more purely philosophical versus more applied (psychology cal or psychopathological) forms of phenomenological inquiry.

Varieties of Phenomenology So far, we have presented Merleau-Monty and Heidegger as essentially consistent with Husserlian tradition. There are, however, important differences to be considered. These pertain less to the vision of subjectivity itself (to its intentional and transcendental na 5 Cure) than to methodological issues.

Epoché

It is well known that Heidegger advocated a hermeneutic approach to phenomenology. This meant questioning the possibility of pristine intuition and pure description, within a more or less straightforward epoché, in favor of accepting the necessary role of presuppo Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology sitions in the self-critical, endless, and always somewhat obscure, back-and-forth process es inherent in acts of interpretation and understanding. On this account of the famous “hermeneutic circle,” pre-judgments are more difficult to remove but also more valuable to retain than Husserl seems to have recognized.

Adopting this sort of hermeneutic vision might, in fact, introduce some doubt about the degree of emphasis, found in Husserl as well as in virtually all contemporary schools of introspection, on attempting to eschew presuppositions. Such attempts are not without some heuristic value, of course; for even if incapable of being fully achieved, they surely do constitute an important moment in the overall interpretive phenomenological Croce Cure. Emphasis on bracketing or faithful explicitation should not, however, be allowed to obscure the potential contribution of interpretive or hermeneutic dialogue in which the experimenter (first as interviewer, later as analyst) might play a more active role in sug Besting and weighing possible interpretations, albeit in an appropriately skeptical, flex ble, and self-critical fashion (more on this later).

(p. 257) Eidetic Reduction A second issue concerns the sharpness of the distinction between what might be consed red eidetic or transcendental versus empirical or factual aspects of, and approaches to, human experience. This distinction is examined in Merleau-Monty’s essay, “Phenomenolo gy and the Sciences of Man”, which offers a subtle discussion and ambivalent cri Pique of Husserl’s presentation of eidetic intuition ( Wesenschau ).

There Merleau-Monty argues that Husserl dissociative identity disorder acknowledge, at least implicitly, a similarity between phenomenological Wesenschau and more standard, “inductive” forms of invest Cation. But Merleau-Monty also argues that Husserl failed to acknowledge this true “ho mogeneity” in a full or explicit manner; and failed as well to appreciate the value and ne cessity not only of a dialectic between empirical observation and abstract essences, but also of the “interpenetration of psychology and phenomenology” that Merleau-Monty (1964: 73) views as a key source of phenomenological insight. Philosophy, writes Merleau- Monty (1964: 92), “must begin by understanding the lived experiences.” He echoes Hei dagger (perhaps also the explicitationists): “Finally this essence is accessible only in and through the individual situation in which it appears. When pushed to the limit, eidetic psychology becomes analytic-existential” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 95).

Merleau-Monty here clearly tilts toward a hermeneutic rather than a foundationalist or logic-inspired vision of phenomenological inquiry. Indeed his views erode any too-sharp differentiation between a supposedly essence-oriented, transcendental condition of true “phenomenology” versus a “merely” empirical approach supposedly exemplified by “in trospection,” phenomenological psychology, or phenomenological psychopathology. The phenomenologist, writes Merleau-Monty, must in fact “find a way of knowing which is nei her deductive nor purely empirical,” thereby avoiding both the Scylla of psychologist and the Charybdis of logicism (1964: 55). “It is essential,” in any case, “that this abstract Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology phenomenology [with its interest in essences] should come into contact with the facts...” (Merleau-Monty 1964: 91).

To illustrate what “contact with the facts” can mean, Merleau-Monty describes Husserl’s encounter, in the mid-1930s, with French philosopher and anthropologist Lu sen Levy-Bruhl’s writings on the experience of time and myth in the tribal or “primitive” mind. “Before this,” writes Merleau-Monty, “Husserl had maintained that a mere imagine Dive variation of the facts would enable us to conceive of every possible experience we might have” (1964: 90). Pure eidetic intuition is supposed to yield “a body of apriori knowledge that is not in any way a matter of empirical fact but of universal principles” (Palmer in Husserl 1997: 210)—namely, what Husserl (1997: 487) termed a “philosophical knowledge of the given world [that] allows us to grasp the invariant Essen ital form, the pure ratio of the world, including all of its regional spheres of being.” Husserl’s encounter with Levy-Bruhl’s compelling account of people described as living in a “flowing present,” devoid of “historical time,” shook his belief in such a capacity (1964: 90–91). The encounter forced Husserl to recognize that “the imagination, left to itself, is unable to represent the possibilities of existence which are realized in different cul Cures” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 90).

To this latter point we might add: “which are realized in different psychopathological con Editions.”

(p. 258) Many of the points discussed in this chapter can, in fact, be illuminated by brief consideration of phenomenological psychopathology. Phenomenological psychopathology might well seem vulnerable to some of the same criticisms that Husserl had directed at introspection—for it too is largely an empirical enterprise, and one that can hardly be grounded in a purely eidetic form of intuition.

Phenomenological Psychopathology It seems clear that phenomenological psychopathologists—students of abnormal subject tivity—attempt to adopt both the intentional and transcendental standpoints. Apprecia son of the world-directed as well as subjective/constituting nature of their object of study (that is, of abnormal subjectivity) is illustrated by phenomenological descriptions of, for example, typically schizophrenic, manic, or psychotically depressed ways of experiencing time and space, or the overall “atmospheric” qualities of their lived world or experiential universe. It is difficult, however, to see how ei her the eidetic reduction ( Wesenschau ) or the epoché could be appropriate in phenom nological psychopathology—at least in anything like a pure form.

How, after all, could a phenomenological psychiatrist or psychologist (unless, of course, she has herself been psychotic) rely primarily on her own, taken-for-granted understand ing of human experience as a way of discovering—via some kind of a prior eidetic educ son—the essential features of, say, the “delusional mood” in prodromal schizophrenia? Phenomenological psychopathology obviously involves a sort of second-person or third- Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology person phenomenology. Here the need for a careful gathering and sifting of subjective re ports from patients or other sufferers is perfectly obvious—yet this is the very sort of em pirical enterprise that seems to be excluded in Husserl’s vision of Wesenschau or eidetic intuition (at least prior to his encounter with Levy-Bruhl).

A second point pertains to the issue of bracketing or epoché, and to the need for a more hermeneutic approach.

That phenomenological psychopathology involves empirical examination does not imply that its investigations should be purely empiricist in nature—in the sense of being ground ed in experiences devoid of interpretation or conceptual understanding. One could, after all, hardly hope to imagine, or intellectually to grasp, the altered time-experience in schizophrenia, depression, or mania if one lacked all theoretical understanding of the na Cure of temporality in normal persons—including, for example, such notions as William James’s “specious present” or Husserl’s “duration block” of “retention/primal-impression/ protection”.

To explore a patient’s abnormal experience of self, time, space, or atmosphere, for exam ple, it is necessary to pose some quite specific but open-ended questions (typically a “se mi-structured interview”) that, at the very least, identify these domains and ask about some possible ways in which they might in fact be altered. This suggests the need for something closer to a hermeneutic dialogue than to the pristine bracketing of assumptions on which both Husserl and recent introspectionists place so much emphasis.

Consideration of the source of these guiding concepts, so crucial for effective interview ing as well as subsequent analysis, does suggest, however, that something like an eidetic (p. 259) orientation—even if not in a purist, quasi-logicist form—cannot be entirely dis missed. For as Husserl noted, to grasp such concepts as “precept” or “image,” “percep son” or the “imaginary,” also of time, space, or selfhood—all necessary for inquiry into subjective dimensions of psychopathology—does require some consulting of one’s own ex perience, without which they would remain empty words. This is the contribution of Husserl’s eidetic psychology, which Merleau-Monty (1964: 58) describes as “a reflective effort by which we clarify the fundamental notions which psychology [and, we would add, psychopathology] uses constantly, through a contact with our own experience.”

This does not mean, however, that empirical consideration of actual experiences, include ing abnormal ones, does not also have the potential to contribute to our refinement of the basic concepts. With psychotic disorders, the “refinement” in question may even turn out to be revolutionary, in the sense that the researcher must strive to conceive what may not, at least at first, seem to be imaginable, thereby coming to construct concepts that might not otherwise have existed. The study of basic-self or ipseity disturbances in schizo phrenia might, for instance, inspire phenomenologists and other philosophers to question the necessary universality of what is sometimes called the cogito, while also suggesting, to some, the need to distinguish between different aspects of basic self-experience (name Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology ly, “possession” versus “agency”) that had not previously been appreciated ( Zahavi 6 2005).

All this shows, according to Merleau-Monty, “that knowledge of essences is altogether ex periential, that it does not involve any kind of supersensible faculty,” but also “that any knowledge of facts always involves an a prior understanding of essence” (1964: 72). As Merleau-Monty (1964: 58) suggests, it is too simple to say that whereas “knowledge of facts belongs to psychology,” the “definition of the notions which will enable us to under stand these facts belongs to phenomenology.” “Empirical psychology” is not, in fact, al ways and only “preceded by an eidetic psychology” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 58), as Husserl sometimes claimed, since it sometimes has an impact on eidetic psychology itself. It is dif ficult to imagine a more compelling illustration of the hermeneutic vision of truth-seeking as a constant tacking back and forth—between theory and evidence, between essence and existence.

Conclusion The relationship between introspection and phenomenology is far from straightforward, and must be understood in light of the heterogeneous nature of the various projects and approaches that have adopted these labels. Depending on how one understands each term, “introspection” and “phenomenology” can seem either mutually congruent or Wadi ally at odds. PAGE_BREAK 2 ( ) The very intensity of Husserl’s repudiation of introspection and naturalism, together with his inconsistent recognition/denial of their possible “interpenetration”, suggests he might have been, in some sense, intellectually traumatized by this experience. This, obviously, is itself a psychologistic suggestion— though interesting nonetheless.

Introspection, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology 3 ( ) There may be something literal-minded about taking the term “introspection” too Jeri ously, especially if one recognizes, as dissociative identity disorder both Heidegger and the later Husserl (together with his student Eugene Fink 1995: 88ff.), that language, whose origins lie mainly in con Crete experience of the physical world ( within the natural attitude), is inevitably misleading when applied to experience or human existence as such.

4 ( ) On this issue, consider Husserl’s comment on “phenomenological psychology” in his 1928 Amsterdam lectures: “Even as an eidetic phenomenologist, the psychologist is ran scendentally naïve. However much he or she may try to put everything psychophysical out of play in directing his/her interest toward the purely mental, these are still actual or possible ‘minds,’ minds thought of completely in the relative sense of this word as always the minds of bodies out there, that is to say, mind of concrete human beings in a spatial world” (1997: 242). But for skepticism about the cogency of Husserl’s transcendentalphenomenology-vs-phenomenological-psychology distinction, see Melton (2000: 67, 114f., 267–269).

5 ( ) Ideally we would also consider the variation within Husserl himself, not only his Bevel opment over time, but also possible internal inconsistencies: e.g. on the importance of the “life-world,” the value of “induction”, and the unavoidability of error in any attempt to describe the “transcendental”.

6 ( ) Another possible example is “phantom concreteness,” a phenomenon that might sug est the possibility of a mode of experience that merges aspects of perception and magi nation in unanticipated ways.

Louis A. Sass Department of Clinical Psychology, Rutgers University Adam Fishman Department of Psychology, Hunter College Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences # Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences Shaun Gallagher The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Phenomenology and cognitive science reviews the relationship between firsthand secondperson phenomenological descriptions of experience, and third-person cognitive explana sons in the context of psychopathology. Taking schizophrenic symptoms of delusions of control and thought insertion as examples, this chapter addresses the question of whether we should take phenomenological reports in clinical settings at face value or in terpret them informed by wider context and/or scientific background. The chapter also looks at how phenomenological analysis can contribute to empirical studies of the expert Fences of agency and ownership, and to the development of cognitive theory that seeks to explain delusional disorders of such experiences. It is argued that the interpretation of patients’ phenomenological reports can motivate empirical experiments that seek to den tidy processes that might contribute to explaining anomalous or alien experience and that communication between phenomenology, cognitive science, and psychiatry involves a multi-directional mutual enlightenment.

Keywords: phenomenology, cognitive science, schizophrenia, delusions of control, thought insertion, agency, own reship # Introduction PHENOMENOLOGICAL approaches to experience are traditionally understood to rely on first-person reflection. In settings that involve clinical psychopathology, however, phe nomenology has relied on second-person methods, such as interviews and the reports and vignettes that result from them. For the phenomenological psychiatrist, what is imper ant, at least as a starting point, is understanding the lived experience of the patient, and not just the objective symptoms that can be checked off on a diagnostic list. In contrast to phenomenology, cognitive science offers third-person explanations, often posed at the subpersonal level and with special attention paid to near al processes. Cognitive science is sometimes viewed as supporting a medicalized ap roach to psychopathology, and in some sense opposed to a phenomenological approach.

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences Phenomenology taken in a strict sense, following the work of Husserl, brackets the kind of naturalistic explanations found in cognitive science and offers a transcendental anally sis of experience. For these reasons phenomenology and cognitive science have been un derstood to be mutually exclusive approaches.

Over the past two decades, however, there have been various efforts to naturalize phe nomenology. Rather than taking phenomenology and cognitive science as mutually exclusive, they have been framed as mutually con straining, or mutually enlightening. On the one hand, these attempts have been controversial, encountering resistance from both cognitive sci Dentists and phenomenologists. Cognitive scientists, however, often misconstrue phenomenology as psychological intro section; and phenomenologists usually consider the idea of mutual constraints as contra Victory. On the other hand, one can find some support for the idea that phenomenology and cognitive science are not necessarily opposed. Thus Husserl himself maintains that “every analysis or theory of transcendental phenomenology—including... the theory of the transcendental constitution of an objective world—can be developed in the natural realm, by giving up the transcendental attitude” (p. 263) (Husserl 1970: 159). Husserl was not anti-science, even if he was anti-scientistic. Others in the phenomenological tradition have made significant advancements toward establishing a mutually enlightening Bela tionship with empirical science. Thus, Gurwitsch, Sartre, and Merleau-Monty pursued what could be generally called phenomenological psychology. Gurwitsch appealed to gestalt psychology, animal studies, and developmental psychology to support his phenom ecological accounts (Gurwitsch 2009: 246). Sartre played off of empirical psychology in his analysis of the imagination, making references to experimental research (e.g. Sartre 2004: 107ff.). Merleau-Monty is well known for his integration of phenomenology, psychology, and neurology. He made extensive use of the experimental literature and case studies, and in his lectures he discussed a “convergence” of phenom nology and psychology, explicating various misunderstandings on both sides of this Bela tionship (Merleau-Monty 1964; Merleau-Monty 2010: 317).

Over the past two decades, however, there have been various efforts to naturalize phe nomenology. Rather than taking phenomenology and cognitive science as mutually exclusive, they have been framed as mutually con straining, or mutually enlightening. On the one hand, these attempts have been controversial, encountering resistance from both cognitive sci Dentists and phenomenologists. Cognitive scientists, however, often misconstrue phenomenology as psychological intro section; and phenomenologists usually consider the idea of mutual constraints as contra Victory. On the other hand, one can find some support for the idea that phenomenology and cognitive science are not necessarily opposed. Thus Husserl himself maintains that “every analysis or theory of transcendental phenomenology—including... the theory of the transcendental constitution of an objective world—can be developed in the natural realm, by giving up the transcendental attitude” (p. 263) (Husserl 1970: 159). Husserl was not anti-science, even if he was anti-scientistic. Others in the phenomenological tradition have made significant advancements toward establishing a mutually enlightening Bela tionship with empirical science. Thus, Gurwitsch, Sartre, and Merleau-Monty pursued what could be generally called phenomenological psychology. Gurwitsch appealed to gestalt psychology, animal studies, and developmental psychology to support his phenom ecological accounts (Gurwitsch 2009: 246). Sartre played off of empirical psychology in his analysis of the imagination, making references to experimental research (e.g. Sartre 2004: 107ff.). Merleau-Monty is well known for his integration of phenomenology, psychology, and neurology. He made extensive use of the experimental literature and case studies, and in his lectures he discussed a “convergence” of phenom nology and psychology, explicating various misunderstandings on both sides of this Bela tionship (Merleau-Monty 1964; Merleau-Monty 2010: 317).

Most of the theoretical debates about naturalizing phenomenology have taken place out side discussions of psychopathology. Such debates have more to do with philosophy of mind, cognitive neuroscience, and studies of consciousness. In some sense, however, Mimi lar but more pragmatic debates emerge in psychiatric and clinical studies. Phenomena logical psychiatrists have insisted, since the time of Jasper, on the imper Dance of first-person lived experience for understanding disorders such as depression, schizophrenia, and anxiety disorders, and in many instances they have questioned whether third-person explanations in terms of neuroscience can tell us anything useful for actually treating such disorders. Cognitive neuroscience, in contrast, has focused on working out explanations in terms of brain mechanisms and their failures, with little attention paid to first-person reports.

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences Working toward a mutual enlightenment approach, in this chapter I discuss two questions that may throw some light on the relationship between phenomenology and cognitive sci Once in the context of understanding psychopathology.

To what extent should we trust patients’ first-person reports?

How can phenomenology contribute to cognitive explanations of psychopatholo gy?

Interpreting First-Person Reports Even if, in contrast to cognitive science, which sometimes reduces first-person phenom nological reports to third-person data or dismisses them as irrelevant, phenomenology takes first-person reports seriously, there is still a question: What does it mean to take such reports seriously? On one view, it could mean that we take them strictly at face value. On another view it may mean that we balance our interpretation of them by drawing on larger explanatory contexts that may include cogni Dive science.

Dillon and Kriegel argue in favor of taking first-person reports at face value. They consider psychopathological counterexamples to what they call “subjectivity theories of consciousness” which posit a constitutive connection between phenomenal experience and what phenomenologists call the “Fineness” of experience. They cite Jasper as a proponent of such a theory.

(p. 264)

Self-awareness is present in every psychic event... Every psychic manifestation, whether perception, bodily sensation, memory, idea, thought or feeling carries this particular aspect of “being mine,” of having an “I”-quality, of “personally belong ing,” of it being one’s own doing. We have termed this “ personalization.”

(Jasper 1963: 121; italics original)

In defending such theories, they insist on the idea that we need to interpret patients’ re ports at face value. Here I want to set aside the status of subjectivity theories of con sciousness and focus on the issue of taking patients’ reports at face value.

Dillon and Kriegel note that schizophrenic patients with symptoms of thought insertion or delusions of control often expressly disown some of their mental states (thoughts or in Mentions). They cite one of Jasper’s patients: I have never read nor heard them; they [inserted thoughts] come unasked; I do not dare to think I am the source but I am happy to know of them without thinking them. They come at any moment like a gift and I do not dare to impart them as if they were my own.

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences (Jasper 1963: 123)

In the case of thought insertion patients describe thoughts that appear to happen “in them,” but that are not their own thoughts. These appear to be reports of phenomenal or conscious experience that lack subjectivity or the character of Fineness.

Importantly, patients suffering from thought insertion and alien control seem to mean what they say: they reject watered-down or metaphorical interpretations...

Jasper was thus confronted with the following dilemma: either (a) we can make sense of the patients’ reports, but subjectivity theories should be rejected, or (b) subjectivity theories need not be rejected, but the patients’ reports must be deemed unintelligible or incomprehensible.

(Dillon and Kriegel 2015: 32)

Jasper categorized such experiences as cases of depersonalization (Jasper 1963: 121), although he claims that such experiences are incomprehensible since “we are not able to have any clear sight of a psychic event without our self-awareness being involved” ( Jasper 1963: 578). If that is the case, Jasper concluded, only a neuroscientif ic explanation can make sense of such unintelligible delusions and in this case phenom nological psychopathology is of limited value.

If we take the patient’s report at face value, however, and try to make sense of it, then it suggests that there are conscious experiences that do not have the character of mine Bess. This is especially so if we treat the patients as generally rational. As Dillon and Kriegel point out, one finds similar reports in cases of somatoparaphrenia, depersonalize son, and other cases of non-delusional alienation symptoms, where patients manifest ra tonal behavior outside of these symptoms.

In response to this problem of understanding a first-person experience that lacks a sense of Fineness, one view seemingly denies the face value of the patient’s report. For exam ple, a number of theorists claim that when the patient describing thought insertion says that the thought is not his own, he really means that he is not the agent of that thought. This view depends on a distinction between sense of self-agency (SA) and sense of Fineness or ownership (SO). Although the patient seems to be saying that he is not the owner of the thought, he is in fact complaining that the thought is something he experiences, or that it appears in his own stream of (p. 265) consciousness, which seems to suggest that there is SO for the thought. What the patient means, on this view, is that the thought seems to be generated by some other agent—thus, he has no SA for the thought. This interpretation, however, according to Dillon and Kriegel, is “uncharitable to the patients” since we are not taking their first-person reports at face value. Moreover, they argue, explanations in terms of SA do not explain the fact that the thought feels alien.

An alternative proposal is that there is a failure to reflectively endorse the thought as one’s own. The patient judges the thought not to fit with her own theory or narrative Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences about herself and for that reason either denies that she is the agent, or denies that she is the owner of the thought. This judgment, however, is a matter of mental state attribution or a reflective process rather than a matter of first-order experience. A related proposal is suggested and Bevel oped by Dillon. He argues that the subject does not have phenomenal experience of the thought that he labels as inserted. Rather, the phenomenology of inserted thoughts is purely a second-order (reflective) phenomenology. Specifically, the inserted thought lacks phenomenality and therefore subjectivity (a quality of ownership the subject can at 1 tribute to himself). Dillon and Kriegel, however, argue that this does not explain the alien feeling of the thought since a person may experience unbidden thoughts he does not endorse, but, in contrast to thought insertion, he does not fail to judge them as his own thoughts.

More positively, Dillon and Kriegel argue that rather than taking the alien character of the experience as a case of something (agency or endorsement) going missing, we should consider that the alien character is something added to the thought. Moreover, this interpretation is more faithful to the face value of the patient’s reports since they complain of something alien being inserted into their expert Once, not of something missing.

Such interpretations rely on taking the first-person report of the patient seriously. If the subject says “This is not my thought,” he is, in effect, denying SO for that thought ( Dillon 2013: 299). Does taking the subject’s first-person report seriously mean that one needs to take it literally, in this case as a statement about SO? Surely we should not assume that the schizophrenic subject is adopting the philosophic-scientific conceptual distinction be tween SO and SA and is using it to express his complaint. Indeed, as Dillon and Kriegel suggest, “we cannot reasonably expect [patients] to spontaneously master some concept Dual distinctions that philosophers have just started to draw rigorously” ( Dillon and Kriegel 2015: 45). Only if we knew that the subject adopted such a specialized vocabulary would we be required to follow what Dillon defines as the “Phenomenological principle: If the patient says that an occurrent thought is not his, then it is not subjective [i.e. owned]” ( Dillon 2013: 299). Indeed, the paradoxical nature of the report of thought infer son is that when the subject says “This is not my thought,” the subject is not complaining that the thought is not part of his experience—indeed, his complaint is precisely that the alien thought is part of his experience, and he might better say: “This thought does not feel like mine, although it is mine insofar as it is something that I experience.”

(p. 266) Phenomenology is not just a method of describing or taking things at face value. It is a form of inquiry into first-person lived experience, and this sometimes involves inter pretations that may be informed by other types of investigations. On this view, the proper phenomenological principle is actually a hermeneutical principle, namely, through interview and careful interpretation we discern the patient’s lived experience. That interpretation should be informed and/or confirmed by what we know via other methods. It is important to get the phenomenology right, but this does not mean that one ought to accept the first-person report at face value. One’s interpretation Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences should be balanced by other evidence. If, for example, evidence from cognitive science suggests that brain processes that correlate with the sense of agency are disrupted in pa taints who experience thought insertion or delusions of control this may count as indicative of how we should un derstand a patient’s report. In fact, however, it can go the other way as well; a patient’s phenomenological report, and its interpretation, can motivate empirical experiments that seek to identify processes that might contribute to explaining the anomalous or alien ex perience. To the extent that the communication between phenomenology and empirical science goes both ways on this kind of issue, this would count as a form of mutual Penlight enment.

Phenomenological Interventions in Cognitive # Explanations of Psychopathology Phenomenology and Empirical Studies Empirical sciences that study proper and pathological functioning are not interpretationfree, of course. There may be general agreement about the fact that neuronal processes in the inferior parietal cortex are activated under certain experimental conditions, or in some pathological cases. The interesting question then is what such activation means. I will first look at two examples of how phenomenology can inform the interpretation of ex perimental results.

In the first example, Fairer et al. (2003 ) found activation in the inferior parietal cortex as sociated with a disruption in the sense of agency. They explain this as follows: We have proposed the activity seen in inferior parietal cortex relates to the feeling of loss of agency associated with the discrepancy between intended actions and sensory feedback. However, from the experiment discussed so far it is possible that the activity in this region relates solely to the sensory discordance. The feel ing of agency might relate to activity in other regions. We think this is unlikely on the basis of various pathological cases in which the primary disorder concerns the feeling of agency rather than sensory discordance.

(Fairer et al. 2003: 329)

Yet they also note that lesions of the inferior parietal cortex may be associated with so matoparaphrenia—where a patient may experience her limb as an alien object and be Sieve that it belongs to another person (Fairer et al. 2003: 329). Somatoparaphrenia, how ever, is (p. 267) usually interpreted to be about a failure of the sense of ownership (or a disownership), rather than the sense of agency. What would allow us to say clearly whether it is SO or SA that is disrupted?

Likewise, in a second example experiment, Fairer and Firth associate activation of the anterior insula with a positive experience of agency. They explain this as follows: Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences One aspect of the experience of agency that we feel when we move our bodies through space is the close correspondence between many different sensory sig Gals. In particular there will be a correspondence between three kinds of signal: somatosensory signals directly consequent upon our movements, visual and Audi Cory signals that may result indirectly from our movements, and last, the corollary discharge [efferent signal] associated with motor commands that generated the movements. A close correspondence between all these signals helps to give us a sense of agency.

(Fairer and Firth 2002: 601–602)

Yet the integration of somatosensory signals with visual and auditory signals is often in terpreted to be the basis for the sense of ownership for one’s body and one’s actions. For example, Tsakiris and Haggard associate SO with sensory integration, and they note that activity in the insula is found in the absence of movement, which implies that this area may in fact reflect body-ownership rather than agency. The question is once again, what would allow us to say clearly whether it is SO or SA that is disrupted?

In Fairer et al., subjects were not asked to describe their experience. They were simply asked, after they moved a joystick ostensibly controlling movement on a computer screen, whether the movement of a hand on the computer screen represented “their own movement, their own movement distorted, or the movement of another agent” ( Fairer et al. 2003: 325). Is a question about one’s “own” movement in contrast to another’s move Bent a question about ownership or agency?

Fairer and Firth elicited no reports from their subjects. Rather, the subjects were informed whether they were actually controlling the movement on the computer screen or not. The experimenters were looking for neural correlations that discriminated be tween when the subject knew she was in control versus when she was told that she was not in control of the movement (although in each case she was moving the joystick). There is much more to be said about these experiments, but the question here is what the experimenters took as the basis for their interpretation con corning SA and SO.

Both studies started by assuming a phenomenological distinction between SA and SO, with the intent of trying to identify the neural correlates of SA. Yet it was never clear what the subjects were actually experiencing. In this case, there was no clear attempt to confirm the interpretation of the experimental results by consulting the subjects’ phenomenology. This is a good example of how phenomenology dissociative identity disorder contribute to these experiments (by “frontloading” phenomenological distinctions between SA and SO; see Gallagher 2003 ), but could have played a further confirmatory role with respect to in terpreting the results.

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences Phenomenology and Cognitive Theory Outside of experimental situations, when one is attempting to develop a cognitive theory that would explain psychopathological symptoms, such as delusions of control or thought (p. 268) insertion in schizophrenia, phenomenology may also be relevant. Firth, for example, developed an influential explanation of exactly such symptoms based on cogni Dive neuroscience. His explanation relied on an important insight about motor control processes that help to explain differentiation between self-generated movement and movement that is not self-generated. He relied on the notion of a comparator (or forward model) mechanism responsible for self-monitoring, and proposed that this self-monitoring process was disrupted in cases of delusions of control and thought insertion. Whether comparator models provide an adequate account of delusions of control is still a contra versial question (see e.g. Frisson 2012; Grünbaum 2015; Langland-Hassan 2008; Synofzik, Vosgerau, and Newel 2007), although there is some empirical evidence and reasonable intuitions to support it. The explanation involves the idea that a copy of the efferent sig nal or motor command (efference copy) somehow is not properly delivered to the forward comparator, although reafferent signals or sensory feedback registering the actual move Bent is properly delivered. Because of the failure of efference copy or the forward com parator, the agent’s intention is not registered and there is a mismatch between intended movement and actual movement. This is interpreted as a disruption in the sense of agency for that movement, thus seeming alien to the subject. This explanation correlates nicely with phenomenological reports concerning the disruption in SA in delusions of con tool (see previous section).

Outside of experimental situations, when one is attempting to develop a cognitive theory that would explain psychopathological symptoms, such as delusions of control or thought (p. 268) insertion in schizophrenia, phenomenology may also be relevant. Firth, for example, developed an influential explanation of exactly such symptoms based on cogni Dive neuroscience. His explanation relied on an important insight about motor control processes that help to explain differentiation between self-generated movement and movement that is not self-generated. He relied on the notion of a comparator (or forward model) mechanism responsible for self-monitoring, and proposed that this self-monitoring process was disrupted in cases of delusions of control and thought insertion. Whether comparator models provide an adequate account of delusions of control is still a contra versial question (see e.g. Frisson 2012; Grünbaum 2015; Langland-Hassan 2008; Synofzik, Vosgerau, and Newel 2007), although there is some empirical evidence and reasonable intuitions to support it. The explanation involves the idea that a copy of the efferent sig nal or motor command (efference copy) somehow is not properly delivered to the forward comparator, although reafferent signals or sensory feedback registering the actual move Bent is properly delivered. Because of the failure of efference copy or the forward com parator, the agent’s intention is not registered and there is a mismatch between intended movement and actual movement. This is interpreted as a disruption in the sense of agency for that movement, thus seeming alien to the subject. This explanation correlates nicely with phenomenological reports concerning the disruption in SA in delusions of con tool (see previous section).

The problem, however, is that when this explanation is applied to thought insertion, it does not seem phenomenologically accurate. Firth’s model assumes that, as in the case of a motor action, in the case of thinking we experience an effortful intention. The intention to think, according to Firth, is the element that bestows a sense of agency for the thought. Likewise, just as in the case of motor control, an efference copy corresponding to the generation of thought is sent to a comparator, which also registers the occurrence of the actual thought, normally matching up intention and thought. If something goes wrong with the efference copy or the comparator, thought occurs which seems not to be generated by the subject, and it appears to be an alien or inserted thought. From the per spective of phenomenology, however, the idea that there is an intention to think in most cases of thinking is questionable. In this respect, however, one might object that phenom Oenology cannot tell us anything about subpersonal processes. Yet it is not always clear that Firth takes the notion of intention to think to be only a subpersonal event since the missing intention seemingly reaches consciousness under the description of a loss of SA —“I dissociative identity disorder not intend to think this thought.” Even if phenomenology cannot say anything di Erectly about subpersonal processes, however, phenomenology can offer some helpful clues about what must be happening at that level if there is some correlating conscious experience (e.g. thinking) that the subpersonal processes are meant to explain. Phenom nologically, an intention to think would itself be a form of thinking, and if it were Feces chary to have an intention to think for every thought that one thinks, one would have an in 2 finite regress. Would this same logic apply to an intention to think even Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences if the intention were subpersonal? And what precisely is a subpersonal intention if it is not simply a process that corresponds to a personal-level phenomenon? Answers to these questions are not clear since the Frithian model does not define the notion of an intention to think in a precise way.

(p. 269) This is not the only problem with Firth’s model. It is not clear how this explana son would discriminate between unbidden thoughts that, as Frankfurt puts it, “strike us unexpectedly out of the blue... thoughts that run willy-Billy through our heads” (Frank Burt 1976: 240), and inserted thoughts. It is also not clear why one would need subperson al efference copy or comparator mechanisms for motor control correction (that typically allow us to keep our actions on track) when we have the capability to keep our thoughts on track at the personal, experiential level. John Campbell interprets Firth’s notion of a lack of metarepresentational self-monitoring as a lack of introspective monitoring: “it is the match between the thought detected by introspection, and the content of the efferent copy picked up by the comparator, that is responsible for the sense of ownership of the thought” ( Campbell 1999: 617). Not only does this again run into the infinite regress problem if one needs an intention to introspectively monitor, in addition if the failure of self-monitoring in schizophrenia involves a lack of introspection, this runs counter to Olin cal reports where schizophrenic subjects report hyperreflectivity that in some cases means an excess of introspection rather than a lack of introspection.

My point here is not to defeat Firth’s explanation but to suggest that systematic phenom Oenology (as well as clinical phenomenological reports) can contribute something imper ant to theory development even when the theory is framed as a neurocognitive theory.

Conclusion I have argued that even in its central business of trying to understand a subject’s lived ex perience, and especially in cases of clinical psychopathology, phenomenology is not about taking patients’ reports at face value. Rather, phenomenology can best understand the patient by tempering interpretations with evidence and best explanations from empirical scientific approaches, including cognitive neuroscience. I have also argued, however, that we should not simply accept at face value what is on offer in such cognitive approaches to psychopathology. In this respect, phenomenology can play a critical but productive role making both experimental interpretation and theory formation more precise.

Let me add a large qualification to the previous discussion, however. If outside of studies of psychopathology there has been some productive interaction between phenomenology and the cognitive sciences, this has been primarily by way of phenomenology pushing cognitive science toward a more embodied and situated perspective following, for exam ple, the inspiration of Merleau-Monty (see e.g. Varela, Thompson, and Ross 1991; Gal 3 lather 2005). A more embodied and situated approach to psychopathology is still to be developed (see, however, Fuchs and Schlimme 2009; Röhricht et al. 2014 ). As things con tine to move in that direction, the idea of a mutual enlightenment between phenomenal Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences ogy and embodied cognitive science can only benefit our understanding of psychopatholo gy.

(p. 270) Acknowledgments The author thanks the Humboldt Foundation’s Anneliese Meier Research Award for sup porting this research. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 3 ( ) By “situated” I mean especially analyses that make reference to the social situation and the patient’s intersubjective relations. In this respect, e.g. the concept of sense of agency is not treated as merely the result of internal brain processes but may also be modulated by social context.

Shaun Gallagher Shaun Gallagher Department of Philosophy, University of Memphis, USA Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 3 ( ) By “situated” I mean especially analyses that make reference to the social situation and the patient’s intersubjective relations. In this respect, e.g. the concept of sense of agency is not treated as merely the result of internal brain processes but may also be modulated by social context.

Shaun Gallagher Shaun Gallagher Department of Philosophy, University of Memphis, USA Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience Massimiliano Aragon The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Phenomenology, naturalism, and the euro-sciences: their relationship poses several teal lunges. Current techniques to study brain functioning (e.g. refined neuroimaging devices) promise to reshape research programs in both cognitive sciences and psychopathology. But should naturalization of psychopathological research dismiss phenomenology, or should phenomenology be integrated with neuroscientific research? Is this an enrichment through interdisciplinary dialogue or a covert form of reductionist? After surveying the several meanings of phenomenology, naturalism, and the neuroscience, the chapter dis cusses the way current cognitive neuroscience operate, focusing on their key tech Piques, possibilities, and limitations. The neurophenomenological movement is then ana lazed, showing that there are differences between the various proposals of naturalization of phenomenology. Neurophenomenology is discussed not only in opposition to Husserl’s original stance, but also in its proper role within the sciences of mind. Finally, the persist Fence within neurophenomenology of some reductionist is highlighted, suggesting the need for a more comprehensive hermeneutics within phenomenological psychopathology.

Keywords: phenomenology, hermeneutics, naturalism, neurophenomenology, neuroimaging, cognitive sciences, psychopathology, interdisciplinary dialogue # The Landscape WORDS may have different meanings depending on the context of use. Consequently, the relationship between phenomenology, naturalism, and the neuroscience may vary de pending on the semantic interpretation of these terms.

Phenomenology

It is a general approach but also a more specific philosophical research program. As a general approach, phenomenology is the study of phenomena as they appear. If we use the term in this general sense, phenomenology is compatible with different philosophical Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience perspectives and also with various scientific approaches. However, used as a synonym for “description of the phenomenon,” phenomenology loses any specificity and can be used even for the individuation of the explanandum in neoempiricist explanations, for example, the influential theory developed by Carl G. Hempen and Paul Oppenheim. As a philosophical research program, phenomenology is a typical exam ple of continental philosophy, encompassing topics like ontology, epistemology, hermeneu tics, and ethics. There is “no unique and definitive definition of phenomenology” because a “unique and final definition of phenomenology is dangerous and perhaps even paradox cal as it lacks a thematic focus” ( Farina 2014: 50). However, we can start from its recon Sized father, Edmund Husserl, and use his ideas as a core prototype. He founded phenom Oenology as a philosophical method whose motto was to go back to the “things them selves” ( Husserl 2001: 168). There is some support for an ontological interpretation of this claim but here it is more important to explore the epistemological import of Husserl’s ideas. In his view, rigorous knowledge is based on a thorough analysis of the way things are given to our consciousness; that is, whatever we know, (p. 274) we know it from the vantage point of our own experience, and there is no access to reality independent of our experience. Objects of knowledge are not independent, objective facts; they are the result of an intentional act of knowing, that is, they exist as objects of knowledge only in Bela son to a subjective pole that knows them. Husserl calls epoché the methodical act of bracketing, of suspending our obvious trust in naturalistic beliefs regarding both the cer Dainty of science and the objectivity of the common-sense world. By focusing on our act of knowing and on things as they present themselves in our conscious field, we can realize that common objects are the product of a complex process of synthesis grounded on man fold partial perspectives. Husserl calls imaginative variation the act of imagining what things would be like if we progressively add or subtract their qualities. By consistently ap plying this method we discover that the object maintains its identity even without some qualities (e.g. of a chair we can progressively change the color, the material of which it is made, etc., and we still have a chair), but finally we arrive at one point when if we sub tract a last feature the object is no more itself. This quality that cannot be removed with out the elimination of the object is its essential characteristic, its Lidos, in Husserl’s words.

Starting from this core view, the history of phenomenology undertook different develop Bents that in some cases significantly diverged from Husserl’s original ideas. There is no space here to follow these developments, but at least we shall stress that French scholars mainly developed the existential import of these views, in close connection with psy chopathological and psychoanalytic reflections and also with influences from linguistics, anthropology, and Hegel’s philosophy. In Germany, one of the closest collaborators of Husserl, Martin Heidegger, progressively diverged from the transcendental philosophy of his teacher to highlight ontological themes and transformed phenomenology into a filo sophical hermeneutics. In his inquiry into Being, Heidegger begins his analysis from the existing being ( Seiende ) that concretely poses the question of Being ( San ) and for whom the answer is relevant. That being is the human being ( Casein ), “and this is why his phi losophy can also be read as an anthropology whose key concepts are relevant for psy perspectives and also with various scientific approaches. However, used as a synonym for “description of the phenomenon,” phenomenology loses any specificity and can be used even for the individuation of the explanandum in neoempiricist explanations, for example, the influential theory developed by Carl G. Hempen and Paul Oppenheim. As a philosophical research program, phenomenology is a typical exam ple of continental philosophy, encompassing topics like ontology, epistemology, hermeneu tics, and ethics. There is “no unique and definitive definition of phenomenology” because a “unique and final definition of phenomenology is dangerous and perhaps even paradox cal as it lacks a thematic focus” ( Farina 2014: 50). However, we can start from its recon Sized father, Edmund Husserl, and use his ideas as a core prototype. He founded phenom Oenology as a philosophical method whose motto was to go back to the “things them selves” ( Husserl 2001: 168). There is some support for an ontological interpretation of this claim but here it is more important to explore the epistemological import of Husserl’s ideas. In his view, rigorous knowledge is based on a thorough analysis of the way things are given to our consciousness; that is, whatever we know, (p. 274) we know it from the vantage point of our own experience, and there is no access to reality independent of our experience. Objects of knowledge are not independent, objective facts; they are the result of an intentional act of knowing, that is, they exist as objects of knowledge only in Bela son to a subjective pole that knows them. Husserl calls epoché the methodical act of bracketing, of suspending our obvious trust in naturalistic beliefs regarding both the cer Dainty of science and the objectivity of the common-sense world. By focusing on our act of knowing and on things as they present themselves in our conscious field, we can realize that common objects are the product of a complex process of synthesis grounded on man fold partial perspectives. Husserl calls imaginative variation the act of imagining what things would be like if we progressively add or subtract their qualities. By consistently ap plying this method we discover that the object maintains its identity even without some qualities (e.g. of a chair we can progressively change the color, the material of which it is made, etc., and we still have a chair), but finally we arrive at one point when if we sub tract a last feature the object is no more itself. This quality that cannot be removed with out the elimination of the object is its essential characteristic, its Lidos, in Husserl’s words.

Starting from this core view, the history of phenomenology undertook different develop Bents that in some cases significantly diverged from Husserl’s original ideas. There is no space here to follow these developments, but at least we shall stress that French scholars mainly developed the existential import of these views, in close connection with psy chopathological and psychoanalytic reflections and also with influences from linguistics, anthropology, and Hegel’s philosophy. In Germany, one of the closest collaborators of Husserl, Martin Heidegger, progressively diverged from the transcendental philosophy of his teacher to highlight ontological themes and transformed phenomenology into a filo sophical hermeneutics. In his inquiry into Being, Heidegger begins his analysis from the existing being ( Seiende ) that concretely poses the question of Being ( San ) and for whom the answer is relevant. That being is the human being ( Casein ), “and this is why his phi losophy can also be read as an anthropology whose key concepts are relevant for psy Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience chopathology” ( Stanghellini and Aragon 2016: 7). These concepts, presented in Being and Time, are general categories indicating fundamental ways of beingin-the-world. They include being-in ( In-Rein ), being immersed in ( San-bei ), being-with (Mit-Casein ), temporality ( Zeitlichkeit ), spatiality (Räumlichkeit ), understanding ( Verse hen ), and thrownness ( Geworfenheit ), and have been considered the “guidelines for re constructing the life-world a person lives in” ( Stanghellini 2013: 344). According to Alfred Klaus, Heidegger’s existential categories must be understood ontologically as character istics of the Casein, in preparation for an inquiry into the fundamental question of Being. In contrast, their use in psychopathology has an Antic orientation, that is, they are con corned with factual phenomena of a concrete person.

To summarize, phenomenology is a term used in different contexts with important differ Fences in meaning but with a shared family resemblance. In general, we may consider an investigation “phenomenological” if it is grounded on philosophical phenomenology, xis tential thinking, or hermeneutics.

Naturalism

In general, naturalism is the view that only natural laws and forces operate in the world and that supernatural or spiritual forces do not really exist. It is also defined as “a sympa thy with (p. 275) the view that ultimately nothing resists explanation by the methods char acteristics of the natural sciences” ( Blackburn 2005: 246). However, we can distinguish the strong idea of naturalism that arises from these definitions from a weaker version. The strong version has an ontological part: what really exists in the world is only matter, that is, reality has no place for “supernatural” or “mental” entities. It also has a method logical claim: everything should be explained by science with its proper methods and this is the only way to acquire real knowledge. The weaker version has also two Lorre spending parts. The ontological claim is that reality is larger than nature and that some non-natural, ideal entities somehow exist. Accordingly, this weaker version of ontological naturalism would accept that mental and social phenomena (e.g. numbers, moral duties, social organizations) are somehow real but would say that they do not belong to the nat Aral order. At this point, there are two methodological possibilities. One is to say that only natural entities can be studied scientifically, hence ideal entities must remain outside the domain of scientific inquiry. But this approach would have difficulty justifying the scientif ic status of mathematics. To save mathematics as a science, the other possibility is to make a further distinction between empirical and non-empirical sciences, which is the classic distinction between synthetic and analytic sciences. Indeed, neopositivism and logical empiricism were based on these assumptions and were able to trace a clear dis tinction between scientific knowledge and non-scientific discourses based on their criteria on of significance. When these perspectives collapsed and W. fifth. O. Quine dismissed the analytic/synthetic distinction as a dogma, the consequence was the proposal of a natural zed epistemology based on experimental psychology and hence on natural science. In 1 other words, this discipline should study natural phenomena in experimental conditions Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience in which controlled inputs elicit registrable outputs. What is the copse quince of these philosophical positions for the sciences of mind?

On the strong version of naturalism, cognitive neuroscientists should embrace a form of naturalism that is physicalist, reductionist, and eliminativist. Physicalist in the sense that only mass, energy, and the other physical and chemical properties accepted by the scion tific community are allowed in a scientific view of the world. Reductionist, meaning that all scientific phenomena should be ideally reduced to the microlevel of physical laws. Eliminativist because it is claimed that mental phenomena should be reformulated in sci entific terms while the corresponding “mental” terms should be eliminated from the sci entific terminology. On the weak version, it may be accepted that mental phenomena are somehow real. There is, however, a dilemma here: either mental phenomena are re ducible to scientific procedures and thus naturalized, or they remain as sociocultural con structions or ineffable subjective experiences. In this case, they may be still accepted as real (this is the difference with the stronger version), but not as part of the natural order, hence they are left outside the field of inquiry pertaining to science.

In the end, whatever form of naturalism we choose in our approach to mental phenomena and psychopathological syndromes, the result does not change much: in order to treat them scientifically we should remove their subjective qualities and reduce the phenom non to its underlying neurobiological processes. As epiphenomenal qualities, mental exp riences might be aesthetically interesting but would have no scientific value (as if we were contemplating the beauty of light emission while studying the rules governing the emergence of an optic phenomenon).

(p. 276) The Neuroscience Contemporary neurocognitive sciences are the product of extraordinary technological de velopments that gave researchers the possibility a) to directly study brain functioning in vino while performing neuropsychological tasks, with an unprecedented spatial and/or 2 temporal resolution, and b) to interfere or modulate brain functioning while the expert mental subject is performing the requested task. This technological possibility fueled re search programs based on embodiment theories, here intended as the philosophical/ methodological stance arguing that the mind does not operate in a vacuum but is strictly intertwined with the body and its environmental interactions ( situatedness ). In cognitive sciences, this is promoting a shift from functionalism to embodiment, and from explicit to implicit cognition. Functionalism refers to the classic cognitive idea that what character Sizes the mind is not its material constitution but its functional organization, so we may re produce mental activity in a computer or other devices. On the contrary, the view of the embodied mind claims that because the mind arises from biological constitution, we should not study functional organization in general but its concrete emergence from brain functioning. Explicit cognition refers to classical “theory-theory” models in cogni Dive sciences, in which the language of mind ( mentalese ) makes logical inferences and predictions from available data, while in the cognitive model of implicit cognition there is Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience a pre-reflective automatic activation of brain areas or neurons directly stimulated by salient stimuli.

There is little doubt that the development of neuroimaging and neurophysiological tech nologies has resulted in a better knowledge of brain structure and function. As a copse quince, the distance between effective activity in brain networks and the proxies repre Denting them (e.g. brain images or records of electrical activity) is significantly reduced. There are still some problems “internal” to this domain. These are technical problems (i.e. spatial or temporal resolutions) as well as epistemological ones: for example, the sub traction techniques used in fMRI research rely on the assumption that the subtracted im ages acquired during the rest condition are somehow neutral while we know that there is brain activity also in this state. However, despite these limitations the progress is evident and substantiates the trust in further ad vancements.

Even more promising are the possibilities opened by technological instruments that sim late brain activity or that may interfere selectively with brain activity while the subject is performing a task. At the moment the temporal and spatial limitations of these instr Bents are significant, yet technological advancements promise to improve the situation, and their potentiality in neuropsychological research is high.

In general, current neuroscientific developments are clearly part of a naturalistic scientif ic enterprise, and their successes in the study of brain functioning are evident. Neverthe less, this has also raised epistemological challenges. To what extent can we extend tech nologies developed to study the brain to phenomena that go beyond neurology? Today the common view among neuroscientists, psychiatrists, and some philosophers is that the neuroscience can study not only the neurobiological bases of mental disorders (p. 277) and psychopathological symptoms, but also normal processes like empathy or ethical de Visions. In fact, in the last two decades new disciplines have been formed such as neurophenomenology, neu roethics, neuroeconomy, and neuropolitics, to name just a few. In the next section, we will focus on the neurophenomenological program as an example of naturalization of a filo sophical perspective driven by the advancement of cognitive neuroscience.

Neurophenomenology: Is a Naturalized Phe # nomenology Possible?

The most famous integration of phenomenology and naturalistic research programs in the neuroscience is called “Neurophenomenology.” We will concentrate on Francisco Varela’s influential model, which aims to find “meaningful bridges between two ire ducible phenomenal domains” ( Varela 1996: 340), that is, phenomena that are present in first-person experience at one side, and third-person phenomena established by the cog native sciences and neuroscientific technologies at the other. The basic claim is that in stead of being subjective “noise,” first-person accounts should be taken “seriously as [a]

Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience valid domain of phenomena” ( Varela 1996: 346) that enriches the experimental setting. First-hand experience can be explored and analyzed by a proper method “inspired from the style of inquiry of phenomenology ” (Varela 1996: 347). This method is clearly indent ed to Husserl’s phenomenology (including the terms employed, such as phenomenological reduction, intentionality, etc.). However, phenomenology is used in a wider sense, include ing several elements taken from other traditions like Asian contemplative meditation. This account of phenomenology deserves a critical discussion but for reasons of space this will not be done here. Instead we will focus on the other basic claim of Varela’s neu rophenomenology, namely that first-person experiences provide valid data that can be correlated with third-person data collected in the cognitive neuroscience. On his view, both domains of phenomena have equal status and are not reducible to one another. The working hypothesis is that “[p]Phenomenological accounts of the structure of experience and their counterparts in cognitive science relate to each other through reciprocal con straits” (Varela 1996: 343). Neurophenomenology explores the bridge between them with a “stereoscopic perspective” ( Varela 1996: 344) in which neuroscientific questions can be guided by first-person phenomenological evidence, and third-person neuroscientif ic evidence can suggest new articulations of the phenomenological descriptions. Accord ing to Varela, “[s]Science and experience constrain and modify each other as in a dance” ( Varela 1996: 347). Varela dissociative identity disorder not provide his account with concrete examples of how all this should work, but confined himself to a general outline. Hence, years later the challenge of the “explanatory gap” in the relationship between first-person subjective ex perience and third-person neuroscience still had “to be adequately bridged” ( Futz and Thompson 2003: 32). Antoine Futz and Evan Thompson have presented a suggestive ex pediment where in a perceptive task the basic and variable electroencephalographic (EEG) activity unrelated to the task itself was not considered as “noise,” as is usually the case. Instead, the activity was related to different experiential states of the subject (some subjects were focused on the task, others were distracted, and so on). What is relevant here is that since its (p. 278) early formulation, neurophenomenologists following Varela have progressively added complexity to the model. On the phenomenological side, the methodology to produce and record subjective reports was integrated with so-called sec ond-person methods in order to improve its reliability. At the euro scientific side, it is claimed that the study of single neural processes or structures is not of much use because the neural processes relevant in neurophenomenological studies are those involving “the transient selection of a distributed neural population that is both highly integrated and differentiated, and connected by reciprocal, transient, dynamical links. A prelude to understanding the neural processes crucial for consciousness is thus to identify the mechanisms for large-scale brain processes, and to understand the causal laws and intrinsic properties that govern their global dynamical behaviors” ( Futz and Thompson 2003: 40). Finally, to reduce the explanatory gap between the two poles of the correlation, that is, phenomenological and neuroscientific evidence, a third domain was introduced: “Formal models and analytical tools from dynamical systems theory, ground ed on an embodied-Inactive approach to cognition” ( Futz and Thompson 2003: 34).

Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience valid domain of phenomena” ( Varela 1996: 346) that enriches the experimental setting. First-hand experience can be explored and analyzed by a proper method “inspired from the style of inquiry of phenomenology ” (Varela 1996: 347). This method is clearly indent ed to Husserl’s phenomenology (including the terms employed, such as phenomenological reduction, intentionality, etc.). However, phenomenology is used in a wider sense, include ing several elements taken from other traditions like Asian contemplative meditation. This account of phenomenology deserves a critical discussion but for reasons of space this will not be done here. Instead we will focus on the other basic claim of Varela’s neu rophenomenology, namely that first-person experiences provide valid data that can be correlated with third-person data collected in the cognitive neuroscience. On his view, both domains of phenomena have equal status and are not reducible to one another. The working hypothesis is that “[p]Phenomenological accounts of the structure of experience and their counterparts in cognitive science relate to each other through reciprocal con straits” (Varela 1996: 343). Neurophenomenology explores the bridge between them with a “stereoscopic perspective” ( Varela 1996: 344) in which neuroscientific questions can be guided by first-person phenomenological evidence, and third-person neuroscientif ic evidence can suggest new articulations of the phenomenological descriptions. Accord ing to Varela, “[s]Science and experience constrain and modify each other as in a dance” ( Varela 1996: 347). Varela dissociative identity disorder not provide his account with concrete examples of how all this should work, but confined himself to a general outline. Hence, years later the challenge of the “explanatory gap” in the relationship between first-person subjective ex perience and third-person neuroscience still had “to be adequately bridged” ( Futz and Thompson 2003: 32). Antoine Futz and Evan Thompson have presented a suggestive ex pediment where in a perceptive task the basic and variable electroencephalographic (EEG) activity unrelated to the task itself was not considered as “noise,” as is usually the case. Instead, the activity was related to different experiential states of the subject (some subjects were focused on the task, others were distracted, and so on). What is relevant here is that since its (p. 278) early formulation, neurophenomenologists following Varela have progressively added complexity to the model. On the phenomenological side, the methodology to produce and record subjective reports was integrated with so-called sec ond-person methods in order to improve its reliability. At the euro scientific side, it is claimed that the study of single neural processes or structures is not of much use because the neural processes relevant in neurophenomenological studies are those involving “the transient selection of a distributed neural population that is both highly integrated and differentiated, and connected by reciprocal, transient, dynamical links. A prelude to understanding the neural processes crucial for consciousness is thus to identify the mechanisms for large-scale brain processes, and to understand the causal laws and intrinsic properties that govern their global dynamical behaviors” ( Futz and Thompson 2003: 40). Finally, to reduce the explanatory gap between the two poles of the correlation, that is, phenomenological and neuroscientific evidence, a third domain was introduced: “Formal models and analytical tools from dynamical systems theory, ground ed on an embodied-Inactive approach to cognition” ( Futz and Thompson 2003: 34).

Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience Up until now, we have looked at Varela’s neurophenomenology and its development in Varela’s followers. Varela is also one of the editors of an influential book explicitly aimed at naturalizing phenomenology that suggests there are different ways the project might proceed. In the foreword the editors assert that “Husserlian phenom nology cannot become instrumental in developing cognitive science without undergoing a substantial transformation” ( Petitot et al. 1999: xiii). One of the editors of the book, Jean Petitot, was particularly active in suggesting this instrumental transformation of phenom Oenology, so we turn to his proposal. In an early paper, Petitot argues that through the eidetic method, phenomenology studies the qualitative and macroscopic (morphology cal) structure of the world of things. He then goes on to introduce a bifurcation. If phe nomenology joins these morphological concepts to descriptive ones, then we have a de scriptive phenomenology. On the contrary, if these morphological phenomena are joined to geometrical concepts, then we have a naturalized phenomenology aimed at mathemati ally explaining the emergence of the vague morphological essences on physicalist bases. This requires a change in the language used by phenomenologists to describe phenom na, which should be dErivable from the formalists of physical objectivity. Indeed, there should be a shift from a pre-physical descriptive phenomenology to a post-physical object tivation in which a concept is understood only when it can be transformed in a mathemat cal system to construct the phenomena themselves. This conclusion is in line with the fol lowing sentence co-authored by Varela: “it is not enough that such a phenomenology be descriptive and analytical; it should also be explanatory” ( Roy et al. 1999: 19). However, despite this early overlapping, there is a significant conceptual difference between Petitot’s mathematical and explanatory reformulation of phenomenology, and Varela’s proposal concerning distinct domains in reciprocal constraints.

To sum up, in current programs of naturalized phenomenology there is some heterogene ity at various levels. For the purpose of this chapter, it is noteworthy that there are differ Fences in both the way the term phenomenology is used and the kind of cognitive and/or neuroscientific data to be correlated to such a phenomenology. In general, it is clear that Husserl would have strongly rejected these programs, his conception of phenomenology being anti-naturalistic. In fact, despite many differences in their respective views, a Batu realized phenomenology would be a paradox or nonsensical not only (p. 279) for Husserl but also for Heidegger, Gadamer, and many classical as well as contemporary phenom 3 nologists. Thus, in order to produce a naturalized phenomenology the first thing to do is to reject the way Continental philosophy intends phenomenology and to radically change 4 its meaning and role. Accordingly, if we remain within the original spirit of phenomenolo gy we must reply negatively to our question: a naturalized phenomenology is an oxy moron.

To sum up, in current programs of naturalized phenomenology there is some heterogene ity at various levels. For the purpose of this chapter, it is noteworthy that there are differ Fences in both the way the term phenomenology is used and the kind of cognitive and/or neuroscientific data to be correlated to such a phenomenology. In general, it is clear that Husserl would have strongly rejected these programs, his conception of phenomenology being anti-naturalistic. In fact, despite many differences in their respective views, a Batu realized phenomenology would be a paradox or nonsensical not only (p. 279) for Husserl but also for Heidegger, Gadamer, and many classical as well as contemporary phenom 3 nologists. Thus, in order to produce a naturalized phenomenology the first thing to do is to reject the way Continental philosophy intends phenomenology and to radically change 4 its meaning and role. Accordingly, if we remain within the original spirit of phenomenolo gy we must reply negatively to our question: a naturalized phenomenology is an oxy moron.

However, knowledge often progresses when recognized authorities are challenged and their ideas are critically reviewed. Thus we can argue that we are free to use the term phenomenology in a variety of ways, depending on our aims. If I understand Petitot’s pro postal, his mathematized phenomenology would be very different not only from traditional philosophical phenomenology but also from Varela’s usage, and maybe more akin to Foam Chomsky’s generative grammar. Another possibility is to use phe Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience nomenology as a synonym for detailed phenomenal description of first-person expert Fences. They could be derived (as Varela suggests) from the application at the descriptive level of Husserl’s analyses and conceptual distinctions (e.g. his fine-grained description of 5 temporality), as well as other phenomenological distinctions traced by other authors (e.g. Heidegger’s existential structures). Moreover, these descriptions could be further enriched by using introspective methods of various kinds, resources from meditation techniques, intersubjective (second-person) co-constructions and validations, and so on. Although it uses concepts elaborated in the second part of the twentieth century, the epees Gemological structure of such an approach is akin to the approach explored by Karl Jasper more than a century ago. Jasper used the term phenomenology quite freely as a synonym of de tailed description of lived experiences, and also added that every phenomenon, even the most complex one (like the change of the entire personality structure at the onset of some pathological conditions), could be reduced to the effect of an underlying genetic or euro biological causal alteration: “Every concept in phenomenology and the psychology of meaningful phenomena becomes drawn into the domain of causal thinking to serve as an element of causal explanation. The units of phenomenology (e.g. hallucinations, modes of perception, etc.) are explained by bodily events. Complex meaningful connections in their turn are considered as units (e.g. a manic syndrome plus all its contents can be regarded 6 as the effect of a cerebral process...)” ( Jasper (p. 280) 1963: 305). Now, following this model we explain the phenomenon if we discover the causal connection linking the emerging symptom to the underlying brain dysfunction. As a case in point, an epileptic first-person phenomenon like déjà vu can be explained as output of a depolarization in some brain areas.

This neurophenomenological approach provides new perspectives on phenomenology and, as argued by Marten Overgaard, “[p]Phenomenology, especially phenomenological psychology, could potentially enrich cognitive neuroscience by adding to it a more precise description of its object of research” ( Overgaard 2004: 369). However, Jasper was well aware that although it was always possible to use this method, in practice many phenom ena of psychopathological interest were not explainable in this way. Accordingly, he pro posed to develop an alternative method to understand the motivational chain giving meaningfulness to human experiences and actions. On the contrary, Varela proposed this method as anti-reductionist and as a way to solve the hard problem of consciousness, being apparently unaware of its reductionist implications. In sum, phe nomenology in this naturalized sense is a way to improve phenomenal descriptions of sub jective experiences in order to make them reliable and suitable to be correlated to neu rocognitive evidences. However, this deeply changes the phenomenological program: “naturalization is an epistemological reversal which alters the status of consciousness from primal region (source) to region in the world” ( De Preester 2002: 645). In other words, it transforms phenomenology into the servant of a reductionist research program, that is, a new version for the twenty-first century of the Kraepelinian and neo-Kraepelin ian ideal of using refined psychopathological descriptions as starting points for the ex placatory reduction to neurobiological dysfunctions. nomenology as a synonym for detailed phenomenal description of first-person expert Fences. They could be derived (as Varela suggests) from the application at the descriptive level of Husserl’s analyses and conceptual distinctions (e.g. his fine-grained description of 5 temporality), as well as other phenomenological distinctions traced by other authors (e.g. Heidegger’s existential structures). Moreover, these descriptions could be further enriched by using introspective methods of various kinds, resources from meditation techniques, intersubjective (second-person) co-constructions and validations, and so on. Although it uses concepts elaborated in the second part of the twentieth century, the epees Gemological structure of such an approach is akin to the approach explored by Karl Jasper more than a century ago. Jasper used the term phenomenology quite freely as a synonym of de tailed description of lived experiences, and also added that every phenomenon, even the most complex one (like the change of the entire personality structure at the onset of some pathological conditions), could be reduced to the effect of an underlying genetic or euro biological causal alteration: “Every concept in phenomenology and the psychology of meaningful phenomena becomes drawn into the domain of causal thinking to serve as an element of causal explanation. The units of phenomenology (e.g. hallucinations, modes of perception, etc.) are explained by bodily events. Complex meaningful connections in their turn are considered as units (e.g. a manic syndrome plus all its contents can be regarded 6 as the effect of a cerebral process...)” ( Jasper (p. 280) 1963: 305). Now, following this model we explain the phenomenon if we discover the causal connection linking the emerging symptom to the underlying brain dysfunction. As a case in point, an epileptic first-person phenomenon like déjà vu can be explained as output of a depolarization in some brain areas.

This neurophenomenological approach provides new perspectives on phenomenology and, as argued by Marten Overgaard, “[p]Phenomenology, especially phenomenological psychology, could potentially enrich cognitive neuroscience by adding to it a more precise description of its object of research” ( Overgaard 2004: 369). However, Jasper was well aware that although it was always possible to use this method, in practice many phenom ena of psychopathological interest were not explainable in this way. Accordingly, he pro posed to develop an alternative method to understand the motivational chain giving meaningfulness to human experiences and actions. On the contrary, Varela proposed this method as anti-reductionist and as a way to solve the hard problem of consciousness, being apparently unaware of its reductionist implications. In sum, phe nomenology in this naturalized sense is a way to improve phenomenal descriptions of sub jective experiences in order to make them reliable and suitable to be correlated to neu rocognitive evidences. However, this deeply changes the phenomenological program: “naturalization is an epistemological reversal which alters the status of consciousness from primal region (source) to region in the world” ( De Preester 2002: 645). In other words, it transforms phenomenology into the servant of a reductionist research program, that is, a new version for the twenty-first century of the Kraepelinian and neo-Kraepelin ian ideal of using refined psychopathological descriptions as starting points for the ex placatory reduction to neurobiological dysfunctions.

Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience Finally, another possibility is to use phenomenology as “phenomenological psychology” in a different and longer project in which “a naturalization of phenomenology might not only entail a modification... of transcendental philosophy, but also a rethinking of the con Dept of nature—a rethinking that might ultimately lead to a transformation of natural sci Once itself.... it should, however, be obvious that the task is daunting and that there is still a long way to go” ( Zahavi 2013: 41). Skepticism about the possibility of phenomenal ogy to change the way scientists operate is mandatory. Nevertheless, in Zahavi’s paper there is a less demanding proposal that is feasible: to let phenomenology and natural sci Fences enter into a dialogue in which each influences the other’s approach. Phenomena logical analyses might suggest to the experimenter possible variations to the experiment tal design, in order to consider some phenomenal issues or details of which he was un aware. Conversely, the phenomenologist could be solicited by some experimental findings to reconsider his phenomenological analysis to see if the phenomenon addressed could be more complex than previously thought (Zahavi 2013: 41). If I understand correctly, this proposal differs from Varela’s in a key point: there would be no mutual constraints but a 7 free choice to be influenced from what is emerging in the other field.

(p. 281) Conclusion This debate about phenomenology, naturalism, and the neuroscience solicits a reflection about the role of philosophy in the dialogue with current cognitive neuroscience. The lat ter are naturalistic research programs whose aim is scientific explanation of observed phenomena. Applied to psychopathology, mental phenomena are outputs of underlying cognitive information processing that, in turn, is grounded on brain activity. We may dis cuss if the cognitive level is just a provisional step along the way to the “real” explanation in neurobiological terms, but this does not change too much for our ends. We may also discuss if, to be suitable for explanatory research, mental phenomena must be objectively measurable, and consequently if we should exclude from our list of explananda subjective complaints. It seems that neurophenomenology has its place here, its fundamental claim being that first-person experiences cannot be dismissed because they are fundamental el Cements for a complete scientific explanation. Consequently, neurocognitive sciences should include them in their research programs. Along this way, phenomenology provides a method for eliciting and describing subjective experiences in order to make them suit able for explanatory research. However, in Varela’s neurophenomenological program this is not fundamental because other methods can be used as well for the same purposes. Hence, in neurophenomenology the role of phenomenology is secondary, and the research program remains shaped by the naturalistic approach of cognitive neuroscience looking for explanatory correlations between phenomena and underlying cognitive and brain ac tivities.

The problem is therefore not only that neurophenomenology betrays Husserl’s orthodoxy. In fact, every phenomenologically oriented psychopathologist dissociative identity disorder the same using phe nomenology and hermeneutics rather freely for his own purposes, largely unconcerned with philosophical orthodoxy. The main problem is that neurophenomenology neglects the Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience fundamental contribution of phenomenological psychopathology, which shows that Batu realistic explanation is just one of the available methods, and that other methods are more appropriate to study the essential meaning of mental phenomena, to be understood with in the broader context of the way a person is in his/her social and cultural world. In other words, the point is not just to include subjective experiences in the field of interest of neuroscientists. This is important but it is not enough. A key issue is to become aware that mental phenomena are not items that we find ready-made in nature and that we can simply observe and describe. Instead, they are the complex result of a hermeneutic con struction in which brain activity, lived experience, capability of self-interpretation of prop 8 9 er experiences, and dialogical negotiation with surrounding environment, strictly inter act. On this, Continental philosophy as hermeneutics has much more to say than simply aiding neurocognitive scientists in the description of mental explananda. To conclude, instead of reducing phenomenology to a methodological tool, we should improve the dialogue between phenomenological psycho ogy and psychopathology at one side, and experimental studies on the other side. Resp Focal constraints (p. 282) and bridge laws implicitly introduce a reductionist naturalize son, while we need mutual respect of the different domains involved, and a free decision to be open to the knowledge emerging in the other field.

Bibliography Aishwarya S. and Mali Ali K.. “Neuromarketing and Neuroethics—An Emerging Trend on Evaluation of Emotional Responses of Consumers to Marketing Stimuli.” Inter national Journal of Innovative Research in Management Studies 1: 27–30.

Aragon M. and Marková I.. “The Hermeneutics of Mental Symptoms in the Cam bridge School.” Revista Latinoamericana de Psicopatologia Fundamental 18: 599–618.

Bernhardt before Christ and Singer T.. “The Neural Basis of Empathy.” Annual Review of Neuroscience 35: 1–23.

Barrios G. E.. “Formation and Meaning of Mental Symptoms: History and Piste mology.” Dialogues in Philosophy, Mental and Euro Sciences 6: 39–48.

Blackburn S.. The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chomsky N.. “Three Models for the Description of Language.” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 2: 113–124.

De Preester H.. “Naturalizing Husserlian Phenomenology: An Introduction.” Psy choanalytische Perspectieven 20: 633–647.

Farina G.. “Some Reflections on the Phenomenological Method.” Dialogues in Phi losophy, Mental and Euro Sciences 7: 50–62.

Heidegger M.. San und Zit. Hale: Max Niemeyer.

Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience Hempen C. G. and Oppenheim, P.. “Studies in the Logic of Explanation.” Philosophy of Science XV: 135–175.

Husserl E.. Logical Investigations, Vol. 1. Abingdon and New York: Rout ledge.

Illman N. A, Butler C. R., Souchay C., and Moulin C. J. A.. “Déjà Experiences in Temporal Lobe Epilepsy.” Epilepsy Research and Treatment Article ID 539567.

Jasper K.. General Psychopathology, 4th German edn.. Manchester: Man Chester University Press.

Klaus A.. “Existential A Priors and the Phenomenology of Schizophrenia.” Dia Rogues in Philosophy, Mental and Euro Sciences 3: 1–7.

Futz A. and Thompson E.. “Neurophenomenology.” Journal of Consciousness Stud ies 10: 31–52.

Olivares F. A., Vargas E., Fuentes C., and Martinez-Pernía D., and Candles-Johnson A.. “Neurophenomenology Revisited: Second-person Methods for the Study of Hu man Consciousness.” Frontiers in Psychology 6: 673.

Overgaard M.. “On the Naturalizing of Phenomenology.” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 3: 365–379.

Petitot J.. “La reorientation naturalist de la phénoménologie.” Archives de Philosophic 58: 631–658.

Petitot J., Varela F. J., Parchoud B., and Roy J. M. (eating disorders.). Naturalizing Phenomenolo gy. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Quine W. fifth.. Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia Univer City Press.

(p. 283) Rossini E., Di Fabio F., and Aragon M.. “1913–2013: One Hundred Years of General Psychopathology.” Dialogues in Philosophy, Mental and Euro Sciences 6: 57–66.

Roy J.-M., Petitot J., Pachoud B., and Varela F.. “Beyond the Gap: An Introduction to Naturalizing Phenomenology.” In J. Petitot, F. J. Varela, B. Parchoud, and J. M. Roy (eating disorders.), Naturalizing Phenomenology, pp. 1–83. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Stanghellini G.. “Philosophical Resources for the Psychiatric Interview.” In K. W. M. Fulford (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry, pp. 320–355. Ox ford: Oxford University Press.

Stanghellini G. and Aragon M.. “Phenomenological Psychopathology: Toward a Person-centered Hermeneutic Approach in the Clinical Encounter.” In G. Stanghellini and Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience M. Aragon (eating disorders.), An Experiential Approach to Psychopathology, pp. 1–43. Berlin: Stringer.

Uttal W. R.. The New Phrenology: The Limits of Localizing Cognitive Processes in the Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Varela F. J.. “Neurophenomenology. A Methodological Remedy for the Hard Prob lem.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 3: 330–349.

Zahavi D.. “Naturalized Phenomenology: A Desideratum or a Category Mistake?” Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 72: 23–42.

Notes:

1 ( ) This phenomenalism is, of course, quite different from phenomenology in the specific sense described above.

2 ( ) This does not mean that it is optimal. Some instruments have very good temporal resew lotion but lower spatial resolution; in some instances it is the opposite; some are in the middle. However, every year new technological advancements improve the situation and promise to overcome current limitations.

3 ( ) e.g. De Preester states that a “naturalized phenomenology is no longer phenomenolo gy” ( De Preester 2002: 645), and Zahavi adds that “Husserl was a staunch anti-natural ist.... And to suggest that the phenomenological account could be absorbed, or reduced, or replaced by a naturalistic account was for Husserl sheer nonsense” ( Zahavi 2013: 30). As we will see below, both authors look for another way to introduce a phenomenological stance in scientific research.

4 ( ) Petitot’s attempt to quote a sentence of Husserl to support the idea that his proposal is not in contradiction to Husserl’s ideas is unconvincing.

5 ( ) As argued by Helena De Preester: “In spite of differences in method and object, it may be possible to preserve the descriptive results of Husserl’s phenomenology. In other words, it might be possible to implement Husserl’s descriptive results in the natural realm” ( De Preester 2002: 642). Zahavi makes a distinction between the original ran scendental philosophy characterizing Husserl’s phenomenology (whose naturalization is a nonsense) and a phenomenological psychology as “a form of descriptive, eidetic, and in tentional psychology which takes the first-person perspective seriously, but which... re mains within a pre-philosophical attitude” ( Zahavi 2013: 38).

6 ( ) This does not mean that Jasper is a reductionist but only that he does not see the search of a causal explanation of mental phenomena as an incoherent or impossible stance. However, he stresses that, to be coherent, those working with this explanatory perspective should avoid psychological reflections because they are outside their disciple nary field. In his psychopathology Jasper proposes a methodological pluralism with sev Phenomenology, Naturalism, and the Neuroscience real disciplines cooperating, everyone from its perspective, to the never-ending task of understanding human beings. 7 ( ) I sympathize with this view, although I would not call it a naturalized phenomenology but a model of possible dialogue between disciplines. 8 ( ) Based on personal, social, and cultural abilities, available idioms of distress, etc. 9 ( ) Including familial and social environment as well as, in the case of mental symptoms, the clinician cooperating with the patient in the understanding of his/her problems.

Massimiliano Aragon Department of Philosophy and Psychopathology, Sapienza University real disciplines cooperating, everyone from its perspective, to the never-ending task of understanding human beings. 7 ( ) I sympathize with this view, although I would not call it a naturalized phenomenology but a model of possible dialogue between disciplines. 8 ( ) Based on personal, social, and cultural abilities, available idioms of distress, etc. 9 ( ) Including familial and social environment as well as, in the case of mental symptoms, the clinician cooperating with the patient in the understanding of his/her problems.

Massimiliano Aragon Department of Philosophy and Psychopathology, Sapienza University Normality # Normality Sara Hanämaa and Poona Taipale The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: May 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords The chapter explicates the central resources that classical Husserlian phenomenology and its contemporary elaborations offer for the study of psychic disorders. We shall first discuss the phenomenological principles that enable analysis of the conditions and limits of experiencing and sense-constitution. We shall then clarify the concepts that phenom nologists have developed for the discussion of the normality and abnormality of expert Incing—optimality and concordance—while also paying heed to the types of phenomena that classical and contemporary phenomenologists have tackled while developing their methods. In this vein, we will emphasize methodological factors that separate phenom nological studies of intentional experiencing from empirical studies of human behavior and psyche, on the one hand, and from alternative philosophical studies of the mind and consciousness, on the other hand. In sum, our chapter shows that phenomenology offers powerful tools for the systematic investigation of several different types of experiential disorders (such as depression and psychosis).

Keywords: normality, optimacy, concordance, experience, perception, sense-constitution, intentionality, disorder, Husserl # Introduction PHENOMENOLOGY offers two kinds of resources for the study of mental disorders. On the one hand, we find a set of analytical concepts developed for the illumination of the conditions and the limits of experiencing. These include the concepts of concordance and optimality that explicate two different senses of normality operative in human experience ing. On the other hand, phenomenology also offers systematic investigations of several different types of psychic and psychophysical disorders, ranging from depression and eat ing disorders to psychosis and schizophrenia.

In concrete phenomenological inquiries, these two types of resources—analytical-concept Dual and thematic—often intermingle. This is due to the fundamental philosophical tasks Normality that phenomenology sets itself. Because it aims at disclosing the conditions of the poss Ability of all experiencing it does not limit itself to ordinary experiences or to the statistic ally most common or most dominant forms of experiencing. Rather, it studies experience in its greatest possible variety and plurality. Individual experiences merely serve as exam Ales that allow us to notice, highlight, and scrutinize general forms of experiencing. Thus, empirically unusual and statistically exceptional types of experiences are as important as ordinary experiences and may sometimes be more illuminative for the task at hand. Husserl even argues that the phenomenologist may profit more from the arts, poetry, and history than from the empirical sciences of the psyche (e.g. Husserl 1963: 184), since phenomenology is not an inquiry into actual or real experiences but is a science of poss Abilities. The aim is to maximize variance, not similarities.

For reasons of accessibility, our exposition will discuss the analytical-conceptual and the masc resources of phenomenology in parallel. We will articulate the main conceptual tools that Husserl offers for the analysis of the normality and abnormality of experiencing and also look into the types of phenomena that Husserl himself analyzed while developing these concepts. At the same time, we will discuss some of the main contributions of Alas sisal and contemporary phenomenologists in the study of psychiatric disorders. Here our aim is to clarify the theoretical character of these contributions and to draw attention to the methods and the types of results that phenomenologists provide for the study of the human psyche.

(p. 285) Preparatory Remarks: On the Character of # Phenomenological Inquiries Before getting deeper into the Husserlian concepts on normality and abnormality, it is necessary to make a few preparatory remarks about Husserl’s investigations. Three methodological factors must be emphasized in particular since they separate phenom nology from empirical studies of human behavior and psyche, on the one hand, and from alternative philosophical studies of the mind and consciousness, on the other hand.

Philosophical Analysis of Constitution The first thing to notice is that Husserl’s concepts of normality and abnormality are ran scendental-philosophical concepts and not empirical ones. They are devised for the pur pose of studying pure experiences and experienced phenomena and of analyzing the processes of sense-constitution essential to all possible experiencing. So, in this context, “normal” does not refer to what is empirically general or average, nor to what is quantity Lively common or statistically noteworthy. Nor is it about the standards of the social be Savior of human beings as described and interpreted by anthropology and the human and social sciences. In the context of Husserlian phenomenology, normal is what contributes to sense-constitution, and abnormal is whatever disrupts the lattices of sense. “[N]Formality is a mode pertaining to constitution,” Husserl writes in his manuscripts Normality (Husserl 1973b: 68, cf. 1973b: 123, 154, 1973c: 35; Steinbeck 1995, 2003; Taipale 2012, Hanämaa 2013; Taipale 2014: 123–124).

A simple example helps to illuminate how the concepts of normality figure in phenomena logical inquiries into sense-constitution. When I enter bright daylight from a movie the tare, the light temporarily blinds my vision. The situation is anomalous or abnormal in phenomenological terms, not in respect to the quantity of light or in respect to the Bela Dive rareness of the situation, but because the appearances that now are formed in my stream of consciousness deviate from the system of appearances established in the dark Bess of the theater. What has been appearing and what now appears do not cohere, and thus for a moment I fail to make sense of the seen environment. A pass ing condition such as this can be said to be phenomenologically anomalous or abnormal.

A recurrent example from Husserl’s own works brings to the fore another idea of abhor malty central to phenomenological inquiries into sense-constitution: When I try on new eyeglasses and scan my surroundings with them, then the appearances that I have of things systematically diverge from the ones that I have had, and thus they break the es tablished harmony and coherence of appearing. The new appearances with the spectacles are abnormal in the same sense as the new appearances in the case of bright sun light. However, Husserl points out that since my eyesight with new spectacles gives the nevi ronment to me more fully and in more detail and specification than my vision without glasses, it normalizes my vision in an important sense despite its discordance with my earlier experiences. To be sure, my new vision with spectacles deviates from my earlier visions and interrupts their coherent progression, but at the same time it promotes dis tinction and articulation in the appearing (p. 286) field, brings a new clarity in respect to visible objects, and allows me to make sense of the perceptual field.

A situation such as this can be said to be phenomenologically normal but in a different sense from the example above: whereas normality there meant coherence between exp riences, it here means added clearness and determinacy in respect to the experienced ob jectivity. Both ideas of normality concern sense-constitution: the first highlights the much al coherence between appearances and the second highlights the correlation between ap pearances and the objects intended.

Intentionality and the Subject–Object Correlation Another basic thing to notice is that since phenomenology studies sense-constitution in terms of intentionality, that is, in terms of the correlation between the subject-related in Mentions and the objects intended, it is bound to illuminate both the subjective and the ob jective side of constitutional normality.

A familiar example of this duality of correlative analyses is provided by the everyday ex perience of spatiality. While the environing world usually gives itself to us with the sense of stability or steadiness, we may occasionally encounter the world without any fixed di Sections or clear spatial structure or order. This happens, for example, in the transitional Normality states of falling into sleep and awaking from sleep. Marcel Proust’s Remembrance of the Things Past involves an illuminative description of the situation: [W]hen I awoke like this [rabidly], and my mind struggled in an unsuccessful at tempt to discover where I was, everything revolved around me through the dark Bess: things, places, years. My body, still too heavy with sleep to move, would make an effort to construe the form which its tiredness took as an orientation of its various members, so as to induce from that where the wall lay and the furn Cure stood, to piece together and to give a name to the house in which it must be living.

1 (Proust 1981: 10)

Here it is not only the attended objects and the environing space that lack stable strum Cures but also the bodily subject of experiencing. In the semi-awakened state between sleep and wakefulness, my own sensing-moving, perceiving, and governing body operates in a non-unitary, irregular manner. The perceiving self, as well as the perceived environs Bent, falters and flickers in search for coherence and stability. So, in this case, there is a rupture both on the subjective and on the objective side of experiencing (cf. Reyes Melero 2013: 105–107).

A different experiential alteration, almost contrary, can be identified in depressive conj sons: instead of dispersing or fluctuating, one’s own body is experientially solidified and hardened and the limits and structures of the environing space are rigidified and closed. Thomas Fuchs describes such changes as follows: (p. 287)

Thus, melancholia may be described as a reification or corporealization of the lived body... The melancholic patient experiences a local or general oppression, anxiety and rigidity (e.g., a feeling of an armor vest or tire around the chest, lump in the throat, or pressure in the head). Sense perception and movement are weak need and finally walled in by this rigidity, which is visible [for others] in the patient’s gaze, face, or gestures. To act, patients have to overcome their psy chomotor inhibition and to push themselves to even minor tasks, compensating by an effort of will what the body does not have by itself any more. With growing inhi bison, their sensorimotor space is restricted to the nearest environment, culmi Bating in depressive stupor.

(Fuchs 2005: 98–99, cf. Fuchs 2002; Micali 2013)

Some mental illnesses manifest even more profound changes on the subjective side of ex periencing and in the core structures of subjectivity itself. Rather than just affecting the patient’s experiences of her own body, schizophrenia seems to damage the articulation of selfhood and Fineness which are traditionally taken to be a prior forms of all experience ing or of all human experiencing. On the basis of this insight, phenomenologists have ar Cued that such conditions involve, not just abnormal changes in the contents of conscious Normality states, but also profound changes in the intensity of self-awareness.

Phenomenologists have also clarified the experiential dimensions of chronic depression and manic-depressive alteration. These studies show that pathological states may effect profound changes in the temporal structures of subjectivity. In experiences of depression, the past weighs heavy and seems to haunt the subject and contaminate each present mo Bent. Extreme depressive states undermine the temporal flow comprehensively and dis Supt its rhythmic progress: the future may seem completely blocked or endlessly delayed or postponed. In the manic phases of the bipolar condition, in contrast, the future seems to condense into the present, and its endless possibilities seem to be available all at once. Thus, the patient may be severely estranged from social re Cations by the experiential fact that for her future possibilities are all given at once and with equal intensities whereas for others such possibilities present themselves in a serial fashion and in diverse temporal distances. Depressive experiences, broadly put, are con ceptualized in contemporary phenomenology not as lacks or deficiencies but as modifica sons of experiential duration and subjective time and as concomitant modifications in af fictive intersubjectivity.

All in all, inquiries into the experiential dimensions of mental disorders suggest that the structures of subjectivity are not static forms but are dynamically developing, and potent sally also deteriorating. This insight motivates one of Merleau-Monty’s main arguments in Phenomenology of Perception: If consciousness were a universal power of signification or a continuum of pure acts of thinking ( cogito ), he contends, then illness would not be able to attack consciousness and conscious subjects at all. The term “mental illness” would merely be an oxymoron or else display a conceptual confusion (Merleau-Monty 1995: 110).

Model of Perception The third methodological point to emphasize is that the concepts of normality were Bevel oped by Husserl originally for the purpose of illuminating the intentional structures of perceptual experience and thing-constitution. When introducing these concepts, Husserl (p. 288) dissociative identity disorder not study the emotive and axiological forms of experiencing (i.e. emotions, de sires, and feelings), or on the structures of our communicative or goal-directed practical lives. The primary model for inquiries into normality and abnormality in Husserlian phe nomenology is the normality of perception.

However, Husserl soon started to apply the concepts of normality in the analysis of other forms of experiencing. On the one hand, he carried the concepts of normality and abhor malty over from the analysis of perception to the study of memory and imagination and the so-called “higher mental capacities,” most importantly, intelligence, reason, and lin guistic communication. Thus, we find in his extensive manuscripts, reflections concerning dementia, insanity, infancy, and animality ( Husserl 1973a–c, cf. Husserl 1988: 187; Taipale 2012: 147–155; Hanämaa 2014a; Fernandez 2016).

Normality

On the other hand, Husserl also transferred the concepts of normality from the analysis of subjectivity to the analysis of intersubjectivity. This became topical when he proceeded from the study of the Toxic experiences of perception and cognition to practical and axis logical experiences and the forms of objectivity constituted in such experiences, that is, values and goals.

When analyzing the structures of intersubjectivity, Husserl made a distinction between abnormal worlds and the normal environing world ( Umwelt ). He called the abnormal worlds alien-worlds (Fremdenwelt ) and the normal world home-world (Heimwelt ) (Husserl 1973c: 176 n. 1, 214, 2008: 336–337; Steinbeck 1995; 2003; Taipale 2010; Staiti 2011; cf. Waldenfels 2004). The basis of this distinction is in the concept of practice and the related concept of membership in a practical community (Hanämaa 2013 ). This means that Multi Lately the distinction between the home-world and alien-worlds is drawn on the basis of familiar and unfamiliar practices. Our home-world is the practical world in which we par ticipate and are members, and the alien-world is any world of foreign practices, that is, practices in which we do not or cannot participate, due to varying differences in our pram tidal orientation, skills, capacities, interests, and callings.

The simple example of participating in a scientific conference illuminates these distinct sons. The elements of such conferences are normal to us due to our familiarity with the academic practices of research and debate that contribute to the constitution of the cul Cure of scientific knowledge. In Germany and Austria, however, the scholarly audience may applaud after presentations by knocking instead of clapping. Despite the unfamiliar ty of the gesture to Anglophone researchers, we can immediately make sense of it as an appraisal on the basis of the shared practical setting of the situation. The home-world of the scholarly practice of arguing and reasoning may thus prevail over national homeworlds.

On the other hand, if the guiding aims of the people attending an event differ radically and comprehensively, then the constitution of a common world may be impossible and we find ourselves at the border between the normal and the abnormal, home-world and alienworld. An illuminating example is offered by Jane Champion’s movie The Piano: A small European frontier-community organizes a Christmas pageant and invites their Māori neighbors to the event. The play that the Europeans perform happens to be a comic ver ion of Bluebeard, involving a scene in which the main character beheads his next female victim. When the performance proceeds to this dramatic scene, the Māori audience, unfa miliar with the theatrical traditions of the Europeans and their performance customs, storms the stage and tries to hinder the event from happening.

(p. 289) It is crucial to emphasize that the concepts of normal world and abnormal world, or home-world and alien-world, are subject-relative, that is, always given to an individual or collective subject. Thus, no world is home-world as such, and no world is alien-world as such, but only in relation to some subject, individual, or collective (e.g. Husserl 1973c: 233; cf. Steinbeck 1995, 2003; Waldenfels 2004).

Normality

With these three methodological remarks in mind, we can turn to Husserl’s concepts of normality and distinguish between two main meanings crucial to phenomenological stud ies of experiencing.

Analytical Concepts of Concordance and Ops # malty Husserl operates primarily with two concepts of normality. On the one hand, he defines normality by concordance ( Einstimmigkeit ) and, on the other hand, he defines normality by optimality ( Optimalität ). An experience is said to be normal in the sense of condor dance if it coheres with other experiences while maintaining the identity of the expert Inced object (Husserl 1973a: 364–366, 1973c: 165, 1980: 490, 1986: 83); and an expert Once is said to be normal in the sense of optimality if it contributes to the richness and differentiation of the experience in respect to the intended object (Husserl 1973a: 379, 2005: 53, 55). Both concepts characterize experiences with intentional objects and with horizons of co-intending, but whereas concordance is determined in respect to other ex periences, optimality is determined in respect to the intended object. Thus understood, concordance is about consistency or harmony between experiences, while optimality is about the clearness, richness, and fullness of experiencing.

The example discussed in the first section of the chapter helps to illuminate these two senses: When I put on new eyeglasses with high-definition lenses, I see better than I dissociative identity disorder without the glasses. The new appearances are optimality-normal in respect to the rich Bess or sharpness of the seen objectivities and the visual field as a whole. At the same time, the very same appearances are concordance-abnormal in respect to my earlier vi ions; they deviate from the established harmony between my experiences (e.g. Husserl Ms. D 13, I, 175a). The optician may even warn me that I first need to move cautiously with the new spectacles, especially when standing up, since my visual and kinesthetic systems (the brain) only gradually adjust to the new type of visual information provided by the glasses.

Both sets of concepts, those of concordance and those of optimality, can be used in the analysis of the structures of subjective modes of experiencing as well as those of intersub jective modes of experiencing. An experience can, for example, be concordant in respect to the earlier experiences of the subject and her individual history of experiencing, and at the very same time be discordant in respect to the experiences of other subjects and a community of subjects (cf. Taipale 2014: 130–133).

For example, a person who is blind from birth is statistically deviant and anomalous in comparison to the majority of the population. However, her experiences, like those of the sighted, proceed in a concordant manner forming a harmonious whole in which local de viations and temporary interruptions are possible. Thus, we can say that her present Normality (p. 290) perceptions, here and now, are concordance-normal in respect to her earlier exp riences and her general way of experiencing.

Moreover, a person blind from birth is also concordance-normal in respect to the comm City of the blind (cf. Reyes Melero 2013: 110–111). It is not only that she can enter into re Cations of mutual communication and understanding with all members of this community (cf. Hanämaa 2013), but also that she can take part in the distinctive practices of this community, including practices of writing and reading (the Braille notation), practices of training and handling animals (e.g. seeing-eye dogs), and special practices of tool-use (e.g. item identification instruments, talking products, canes). Moreover, these practices can be learned and they have their intersubjective histories and traditions in which they are transmitted to new generations. To the sighted they are unfamiliar and unknown, and thus we can say that the sighted person is concordance-abnormal in respect to the history cal community of the blind.

Alternative appearance systems cannot be put in an order of preference by the concepts of concordance. When a rupture or a series of ruptures has first disrupted the old order and finally replaced it with a new concordant order, there is no way of comparing the two orders, the old one and the new one, in terms of concordance-normality. In terms of con cordance, the two systems are symmetrical: both are abnormal from the point of view of the other. For the blind the world of the sighted is unfamiliar and remains so, and for the sighted the world of the blind is equally alien. Thus, other concepts are needed to capture the normative sense of normality implicit in both common sense and scientific discourses. The concept of optimality serves some of these purposes.

Let us illuminate the relations between the concepts of concordance and optimality by de eloping the example of the eyeglasses: I put on the spectacles, and everything gives it 2 self to me in clear contours; I take off the spectacles, and everything in fuzzy. However, nothing in the orderly relations between the “fuzzy” things in the “fuzzy” world tells me that they should be clearer. The idea of fuzziness is as if borrowed from the world or dared by the spectacles. It is of course possible, and probable, that without the eyeglass es I will not grasp all the things that would be given to me if I were to examine the nevi ronment with the eyeglasses. For example, I may not notice that a bus to my work place is approaching since I do not identify the route number marked on its front. But lacking these distinctions is not an internal defect of the world that I grasp with my bare eyes. It is a defect only in relation to the clearer and sharper world given by the eyeglasses (and my interest in identifying the route number). This must not be misunderstood as implying that the world without the eyeglasses would not have any ruptures. It has its own internal ruptures. For example, when tears fill my eyes or when the driving lights of the approach ing bus suddenly blind me, I momentarily see nothing—all established distinctions are lost and the world is torn apart for some time.

The transition toward optimality may be quite challenging. For example, a person who is blind from birth and gains eyesight by an organic transplant proceeds from abnormality to normality in terms of optimality. Her condition is new, conflicting with her earlier Normality (p. 291) experiences, and may elicit many different kinds of emotive responses. Similarly, a person who has been deaf from birth and gains hearing by a transplant inserted in her skull, usually reacts either with joy or with terror. In both cases, the perceptual field is enriched by new unfamiliar types of elements and relations. The integration of these and the establishment of a new coherence demands reorganization of the whole perceptual field and its different modalities: visual, auditory, tactile, and kinesthetic (cf. Hanämaa 2014b, 2014c; Slatman 2014 ). It also requires that the person develops new skills and dis positions and learns new ways of acting. If these can be gained, the person ends up with an environing world with more distinction and richness in respect to many objectivities.

Husserl argues that the optimal trumps the concordant in a similar manner also on the level of intersubjective experience as long as social acts of communication are available and operative. He explicates this idea by discussing the example of color blindness. The argument is that if a community of color blind people came into communicative contact with a community of people who are not color blind, then the color blind community would immediately, without any further ado, “recognize that their world is not the ops mal” ( Husserl 1973b: 33). At the same time, Husserl also argues that in their full senses, the terms “the world” and “the thing” refer to objectivities that are accessible to all exp riencing subjects independently of differences in their apparatuses of sensibility: “[I]t be longs to the actually existing thing to be capable of being experienced as the same for ‘everyone,’ with everyone’s sensibility, which can be ‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’ ” ( Husserl 1992: 363–364; Staiti 2011; Carr 2014; cf. Bani 2004).

Phenomenology of Psychopathology—An # Overview Since its onset, the phenomenological tradition has had a considerable interest in ques sons of psychopathology. The concrete analyses and descriptions that phenomenologists have offered have served two kinds of purposes. On the one hand, scholars have used clinical examples of experiential aberrations in order to highlight, ex negative, the conj sons of normal experiencing as well as the essential structures of all experiencing. On the other hand, the other strong tendency in the tradition has been the attempt to de scribe the phenomenological structure of various pathological phenomena in their own terms. These two lines of research often complement one another. Of the classical phe nomenologists, Merleau-Monty has been recognized as one of the most influential promo Bents of the former approach, but at the same time he has positively contributed to our understanding of various pathological experiential conditions and dysfunctions per se (see e.g. Merleau-Monty 1995: 138).

One of the general tenets of the phenomenological approach to psychopathological phe novena lies in its capacity to complement psychological and psychiatric, and more goner ally all third-person analyses and explanations. With its first-person methods of variation, dismantling, construction, interpretation, and hermeneutic clarification, phenomenology offers crucial information about the ways in which people suffering from mental illnesses Normality (p. 292) experience the world and about the structures of their experiences—information that remains unreachable from a third-person standpoint. By such studies, phenomenolo gy significantly contributes both to our understanding of the meanings and the experien ital genesis of mental disorders and to our understanding of “what it is like” to suffer from mental illnesses and to be a patient.

In the tradition of phenomenological psychopathology, particular weight has been given to analyses of schizophrenia and depression. Karl Jasper, Ludwig Binswanger, Eugène Minkowski, Wolfgang Blankenburg, and Kimura Bin are the main pioneers in this field. Their contributions to the understanding of psychic disorders have mainly concerned the ways in which patients’ experiences of themselves, other persons and the intersubjective environment alternate and transform during sickness. The result of the analyses show that mental disorders affect the fundamental structures of temporality, embodiment, and selfhood, and thus in a comprehensive and global way impair the patients’ possibilities of relating to the others and to the world as a whole (e.g. Jasper 1919; Binswanger 1960; Minkowski 1970; Blankenburg 1971; Bingswanger 1975; Kimura 1992; Bingswanger 1993; Jasper 1997; cf. Sass 2001).

During the last few decades, these traditional lines of research in phenomenological psy chopathology have been carried over and developed further by many new phenomenolo Fists and clinical researchers, including Thomas Fuchs, Louis Sass, Josef Paras, Dan Za have, Osborne Wiggins, Giovanni Stanghellini, and Matthew Radcliffe. These scholars, and many others, have significantly reinforced and increased the conceptual, descriptive, and methodological tools of phenomenology for the theorization of psychopathology, thus re markably furthering also the clinical lines of research.

At the same time, phenomenologists have expanded their inquiries to cover various new types of psychic and psychophysical disorders, including different forms of autism and eating disorders. In autism research, phenomenologists have challenged accounts that analyze the disorder dominantly by the negative terms of lack or deprivation. In this line, it has been argued that the core of autism is not owing to diminished social awareness but rather must be understood in terms of heightened social awareness (e.g. Fuchs 2005: 101, cf. Fuchs 2015). To this end, Louis Sass, Josef Paras, and Dan Zahavi have introduced the idea of hyperreflexivity. Adopting the term from Merleau- Monty, they underline that psychophysical disorders may be owing not only or mainly to deficits, shortages or lacks, but also to the unusual intensification of various experiential functions or structures.

A culmination of this new research activity, is the establishment of the so-called EASE scale in the early 2000s. The abbreviation stands for “Examination of Anomalous Self-Ex perience.” As characterized by its developers, the EASE is “a symptom checklist for semistructured, phenomenological exploration of experiential or subjective anomalies that may be considered as disorders of basic or ‘minimal’ self-awareness”. This descriptive scale has been devised in collaboration between phenomenologists, psychic Normality Wrists, and clinical psychologists on the basis of self-descriptions obtained from schizo phrenic patients, and it has a strong diagnostic and differential-diagnostic relevance. Its theoretical and practical usages demonstrate the power of the firsthand second-person methods of phenomenology.

(p. 293) Conclusion On the basis of our explications of the Husserlian concepts of normality and abnormality, we can now draw three general conclusions.

First, the phenomena of normality and abnormality cannot be adequately analyzed by mere quantitative concepts. Normality and abnormality are not merely statistical or sto chaotic measures but involve deep experiential structures and constitutional dimensions. The phenomenological methodology allows us to disclose these dimensions. Instead of be ing analyzed from the third-person perspective, clinical disorders and behavioral disrupt sons are studied in this framework from the perspectives of the persons who undergo them and suffer from them (cf. Merleau-Monty 1995: 120).

Georges Canguilhem emphasizes the social and existential implications of this method logical factor in The Normal and the Pathological. He famously points out that many con Editions that are rendered pathological by common standards of measurement may be both experienced and understood as normal by the persons experiencing them. Moreover, Canguilhem also argues that experiential life is not merely receptive of and submissive to external norms but is also norm-instituting or normalizing (Canguilhem 1991: e.g. 338– 339; cf. von Wright 1963). Thus, the pathological is not simply abnormal in the sense of lacking the norm or diverting from common norms or working against them; it also stab Dishes its own normality.

Second, the phenomenological concepts of normality are not defined by any ideas of Batu realness or nativity, and correspondingly abnormality is not identified with unnaturalness or artificiality. What is experientially normal may well be artificial, human-made, or cul Aurally mediated; and, on the other hand, many natural and innate processes and situ sons may be experientially abnormal.

Third, since sense-constitution is a dynamic process and not a static principle or a cre Dative act performed once and for all, the phenomenological concepts of normality and ab normality are dynamic concepts. Experiences that are deviant in the framework of the al ready constituted senses are able to institute new sense and thus establish new systems of normality. What is normal in one experiential context may turn out to be abnormal in another, and what has been abnormal for many generative communities for several cen Buries may become normal for new persons in new situations and with new experiential horizons.

Normality PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Self presents phenomenological work on selfhood and shows how it has been impacting phenomenological psychopathology. Most phenomenologists including Husserl, Heideg ger, and Sartre would defend the experiential presence of self, thereby distancing them selves from competing accounts according to which the self is either a high-level social construct or a hidden non-experiential transcendental precondition. Many also highlight ed the deep link between selfhood and self-consciousness, and between self-conscious Bess and intentionality, thereby defending the “co-givenness of self and world.” Eventual ly, however, most phenomenologists went on to emphasize the extent to which a more comprehensive account of selfhood would have to move beyond a purely formal analysis and also consider the individualizing role of historicity, socialite, and normativity.

Keywords: self-consciousness, selfhood, phenomenology, intentionality, normativity # Introduction WHY an entry on the self in a handbook on phenomenological psychopathology? The an Ewer is obvious. Many of the central figures in classical psychiatry considered disorders of the self to play a prominent role in a variety of psychopathological phenomena. Consed er, for instance, Jasper who back in 1913 employed the notion of Ichstörungen (self-Visor Hers) in his account of schizophrenia or Minkowski who decades later wrote: “The mad Bess... does not originate in the disorders of judgment, perception or will, but in a dis turbance of the innermost structure of the self” ( Minkowski 1997: 114). In contemporary phenomenological psychopathology, Josef Paras and Louis Sass have developed such ideas further by arguing that schizophrenia involves transformations and alterations of the very basic sense of self and that such self-disorders may be ascribed a generating, pathogenic role. They antecede, underlie, and shape the emergence of later and psycho ic pathology and may thus unify what, from a purely descriptive psychiatric standpoint, Self may seem to be unrelated or even antithetical syndromes and symptoms.

Both Sass and Paras explicitly affirm their commitment to a phenomenological under standing of selfhood. The self has been discussed extensively in phenomenological philosophy, however. Indeed, even a quick survey will reveal a plethora of partially overlapping, complementary and at times conflicting notions and def ignitions of the self in the works of such authors as Husserl, Schemer, Heidegger, Gur Kitsch, Stein, Sartre, Merleau-Monty, Henry, etc. In the following short overview, a select son is consequently required. My aim will be to highlight some of those aspects and ideas that have been taken up by and been of inspiration to psychiatrists.

Pre-reflective For-me-Bess One way to pinpoint some of the central phenomenological insights concerning selfhood is to proceed via negative. What conception of self do the phenomenologists typically (p. 300) reject? Two different ideas come to mind: 1) According to one classical concept son, the self must be considered a transcendental principle of unity. It is a necessary pre condition for synchronically and diachronically ordered experiences, but it is not itself a datum of experience. We can infer that it must exists, but it is not itself experientially present. Were it given, it would be given for someone, that is, it would be an object and therefore no longer a self. 2) According to another currently popular ap roach, there is nothing primitive or fundamental about selves, rather they are the out come of complicated processes of social constructions, being more a matter of politics and culture, than of science and nature.

In contrast to both of these proposals, most phenomenologists would defend the experien ital presence of the self; it is a fundamental and pre-reflective feature or character or di Pension of experience rather than some high-level social construct or hidden non-expert entail transcendental precondition.

Let me provide a few examples from the corpus of phenomenological writings to substan sate this claim. In the lecture course Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie from 1919/20, for instance, Heidegger argues that any worldly experiencing involves a certain compo Bent of self-acquaintance and self-familiarity, any experiencing is characterized by the fact that “I am always somehow acquainted with myself” ( Heidegger 1993: 251). This self-acquaintance is not occurring outside of or independently of my worldly engagement, rather the self-acquaintance is only to be found in intentional life, that is, self-acquaint Dance is always the self-acquaintance of a world-immersed self. When looking at concrete life experience we will consequently come across a co-givenness of self and world. Or as Heidegger writes in a later lecture course, the “co-disclosure of the self belongs to intel tonality” as such ( Heidegger 1988: 158).

Self

Another recurrent idea in the phenomenological literature is that the primary manifest son of self is pre-reflective rather than reflective or introspective. This is also an idea we find in Heidegger: Casein, as existing, is there for itself, even when the ego does not expressly direct itself to itself in the manner of its own peculiar turning around and turning back, which in phenomenology is called inner perception as contrasted with outer. The self is there for the Casein itself without reflection and without inner perception, before all reflection. Reflection, in the sense of a turning back, is only a mode of self-apprehension, but not the mode of primary self-disclosure.

(Heidegger 1988: 159)

We find a related conception in Merleau-Monty, who writes that we at the root of all our experiences and all our reflections find a being who immediately knows itself, not by ob serration, not by inference, but through direct contact with its own existence (Merleau- Monty 2012: 390). But as he then also goes on to say, “there is no ‘inner man,’ man is in and toward the world, and it is in the world that he knows himself” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: xxiv).

Similar ideas can also be found in Husserl and Sartre. For both of them, consciousness is fundamentally characterized by intentionality. It is this intentional life that is at one and the same time self-involving and world-disclosing. This involvement already occurs pre-re flectively and must be considered an essential and constitutive feature of experience. As Sartre writes: (p. 301)

It is not reflection which reveals the consciousness reflected-on to itself. Quite the contrary, it is the non-reflective consciousness which renders the reflection poss ble; there is a pre-reflective cogito which is the condition of the Cartesian cogito.

(Sartre 2003: 9)

This self-consciousness we ought to consider not as a new consciousness, but as the only mode of existence which is possible for a consciousness of something.

(Sartre 2003: 10)

[P]re-reflective consciousness is self-consciousness. It is this same notion of self which must be studied, for it defines the very being of consciousness.

(Sartre 2003: 100)

As for Husserl, he often argues that the stream of consciousness is characterized by a “Für-site-selbst-erscheinens,” that is, by a self-appearance or self-manifestation ( Husserl 1959: 189, 412, 2001: 44, 46). Husserl also speaks of an “inner consciousness” which is a non-thematic and non-objectifying form of self-awareness that precedes reflection Self (Husserl 1952: 118), and insists that conscious life has the general structure ego-cogitocogitatum (Husserl 1950: §14, 1954: §50). When being intentionally directed at an object, we are never conscious of it simpliciter, but always of the object as appearing in a certain way, say, as judged, seen, hoped, feared, remembered, smelled, anticipated, tasted, etc. The same object, with the exact same worldly properties, can present itself in a variety of manners. It can be given as perceived, imagined, or recollected, etc. But when articular ing the character of our experiential life, it is not sufficient merely to consider the intel tonal object and the intentional act. Experiences are not simply states that happen to oc cur anonymously; they are all characterized by their irreducible first-person character; they are like something for me. Experiences are in short Janus-faced: they are of some thing other than the subject and they are like something for the subject. There is always a genitive and dative of manifestation.

As should be clear by now, when the phenomenologists are discussing selfhood, they are typically not preoccupied with a question that has dominated much of the discussion of personal identity in analytic philosophy, namely the question concerning diachronic per sistency: What kind of features (if any) allows P 2 at t 2 to be identical with P 1 at t? Rather their basic interest concerns the relation between consciousness, self-consciousness, and selfhood. Consider Gurwitsch’s classical distinction between an geological and a non-ego logical theory of (self)consciousness. Whereas an geological theory would claim that when I watch a movie by Hitchcock, I am not only intentionally directed at the movie, nor merely aware of the movie being watched, I am also aware that it is be ing watched by me, a non-geological theory would omit the reference to a subject of exp rience and simply say that there is an awareness of the watching of the movie. Or as Lichtenberg phrased it in his classical objection to Descartes: we only know of the xis Fence of our sensations, ideas, and thoughts. Experiences simply take place, and that is all. To say cogito and to affirm the existence of an I is already to say too much ( Listen berg 2000: 190).

As should be clear by now, when the phenomenologists are discussing selfhood, they are typically not preoccupied with a question that has dominated much of the discussion of personal identity in analytic philosophy, namely the question concerning diachronic per sistency: What kind of features (if any) allows P 2 at t 2 to be identical with P 1 at t? Rather their basic interest concerns the relation between consciousness, self-consciousness, and selfhood. Consider Gurwitsch’s classical distinction between an geological and a non-ego logical theory of (self)consciousness. Whereas an geological theory would claim that when I watch a movie by Hitchcock, I am not only intentionally directed at the movie, nor merely aware of the movie being watched, I am also aware that it is be ing watched by me, a non-geological theory would omit the reference to a subject of exp rience and simply say that there is an awareness of the watching of the movie. Or as Lichtenberg phrased it in his classical objection to Descartes: we only know of the xis Fence of our sensations, ideas, and thoughts. Experiences simply take place, and that is all. To say cogito and to affirm the existence of an I is already to say too much ( Listen berg 2000: 190).

What eventually dawned on a number of phenomenologists was that one might deny that each and every experience contains an explicit reference to an ego, understood as an in habitat in or possessor of consciousness, without opting for the view that our experien ital life is anonymous. Rather than being impersonal, consciousness remains character zed by a basic (p. 302) dimension of selfhood precisely because of its ubiquitous self-con sciousness. To quote the central passage from Sartre once again: “pre-reflective con sciousness is self-consciousness. It is this same notion of self which must be studied, for it defines the very being of consciousness” ( Sartre 2003: 100). Or as Michel Henry would put it, the most basic form of selfhood is the one constituted by the very self-manifest son of experience (Henry 1963: 581, 1965: 53). Thus, rather than defining self-conscious Bess on the basis of a preconceived notion of the self, the notion of self is derived from a correct understanding of self-consciousness. Pre-reflective self-consciousness does not amount to a consciousness of a separate and distinct self. But pre-reflective self-con sciousness is ineliminable first person, and that is all that is needed in order to warrant the notion of an experiential self. To use vocabulary from analytic philosophy of mind, one might say that experience necessarily involves what-it-is-like Self Bess, and experiential what-it-is-likeness is necessarily what-it-is-likefor-me -Bess.

Even Husserl, who famously opted for and operated with a variety of different notions of ego, would not have disagreed. Husserl’s notion of pure ego is, as he writes, not some thing secret or mysterious, but simply a name for the subject of experience (Husserl 1952: 97). The stream of consciousness is not a mere bundle of experiences, rather all ex periencing is the experiencing of a subject that does not stream like its experiences (Husserl 1952: 103, 277). But although the pure ego must be distinguished from the exp riences in which it lives and functions, it cannot in any way exist independently of or be thought in separation from them (and vice versa) (Husserl 1952: 98–99, 1976: 123–124).

One can see the phenomenological proposal as occupying a middle position between two opposing views. According to the first view, the self is some kind of unchanging soul sub stance that is distinct from and ontologically independent of the worldly objects and con scions episodes it is directed at and the subject of. According to the second view, there is nothing to consciousness apart from a manifold or bundle of changing experiences. There are experiences and perceptions, but no experience or perceive. A third option is avail able, however, the moment one realizes that an understanding of what it means to be a self calls for an examination of the structure of experience, and vice versa. Thus, the ex periential self is not a separately existing entity, it is not something that exists indepen Gently of, in separation from or in opposition to the stream of consciousness, but neither is it simply reducible to a specific experience or (sub-)set of experiences; nor is it for that matter a mere social construct that evolves through time. Rather, and to repeat, the (min ital or experiential) self can be identified with the ubiquitous first-person character of the experiential phenomena. The experiential self is consequently, and very importantly, not some experiential object. It is not as if there is a self-object in addition to all the other objects in one’s experiential field. Rather the claim is that all of these ob Sects, when experienced, are given in a distinctly first-person way. In short, if we want to “locate” the experiential self, we should’t look at what is being experienced, but at how it is being experienced.

The account just given only constitutes the starting point of a phenomenological expo ration of self, however, and it has been further developed in various directions by differ ent phenomenologists. Whereas the link between intentionality and selfhood has been emphasized, it is, for instance, natural also to inquire into the relationship between self hood and embodiment or selfhood and temporality. With a few noticeable exceptions (Michel Henry comes to mind), most phenomenologist have also emphasized the embed ied and temporal character of the self. The short argument being that if experience is es sentially (p. 303) embodied and temporal, so is selfhood. In addition, few of the phenom nologists have thought that this rather thin notion of self—as Stein remarks at one point, “the pure ‘I’ has no depth” ( Stein 2008: 110)—could stand alone and have tried to com Clement it with richer notions of self, that to a larger extent incorporates features such as historicity, socialite, and normativity. Sartre has, for instance, discussed how my en counter with others furnishes me with a new ontological dimension (Sartre 2003: 245), Self and Husserl has argued that the personal ego has a different type of historicity and Hindi viduality than the pure ego. The former is constituted through the commitment to specific normative standards, through the establishment of enduring habits, and through the ap propriation of others’ attitudes toward oneself. Indeed to exist as a person is for Husserl to exist socialized in a communal horizon (Husserl 1952: 204–205, 265–270). I am, in short, not merely a pure and formal subject of experience, but also a person with abilities, dispositions, habits, interests, character traits, and convictions, and to focus exclusively on the former is to engage in an abstraction (Husserl 1962: 210).

Pathology of Self Let me in conclusion return to pathology. Even if self and consciousness ordinarily go to ether, might pathology (for instance, cases of thought insertion) present us with relevant exceptions, that is, with cases where experiences are anonymous and unowned in that they lack for-me-Bess altogether? This is a view that has been defended by some. But even though inserted thoughts are felt as intrusive and strange, it is not obvious that they lack ownership altogether, since the afflicted subject remains aware that it is he himself rather than somebody else who is experiencing these alien thoughts. Claiming that the experiences of a patient suffering from thought infer son do not entirely lack first-person character and that such phenomena do not involve a complete effacement of for-me-Bess is not, however, to deny that the clinician should rec ognize that schizophrenia does, in fact, involve a fragile and unstable first-person per spective. But there is an important difference between claiming that thought insertion ex Amplifies a state-of-mind with no for-me-Bess, and saying that the for-me-Bess that is re Gained is frail (cf. Paras and Sass 2011: 532). Frail in what sense? In the sense that the patient no longer simply takes the for-me-Bess for granted, it has lost some of its normal obviousness, familiarity, and unquestionability, and does’t effortlessly lead to or permit reflective self-ascription (Sass and Paras 2003: 430). In other words, we are clearly deal ing with a kind of self-alienation or alienated self-consciousness, but as these phrasings also make clear, some dimension of self and self-consciousness remains preserved.

One lesson to learn is that we might have to distinguish more carefully between two dif ferment phenomenological claims: a minimalist one and a more robust one. On the minimalist reading, the for-me-Bess of experience simply refers to the sub jectivity of experience, to the fact that the experiences are pre-reflectively self-conscious and thereby present in a distinctly subjective manner, a manner that is not available to anybody else. This feature is arguably retained in the pathological cases. On a slightly more robust reading, the for-me-Bess of experience can refer to a sense of endorsement and self-familiarity; to the quality of “warmth and intimacy,” that James claimed charac terizes our own present (p. 304) thoughts (James 1890: 239). This feature can be dis Curbed and perhaps even be completely absent in certain forms of pathology.

Self Bibliography Gurwitsch A.. “A Non-Ecological Conception of Consciousness.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 1: 325–338. Heidegger M.. The Basic Problems of Phenomenology, trans. A. Hofstadter. Bloom ington & Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. Heidegger M.. Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie (1919/1920). Gesamtausgabe Band 58. Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann. Henry M.. L’essence de la manifestation. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. Henry M.. Philosophic et phénoménologie du corps. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. Husserl E.. Cartesianische Meditationen und Parser Vorträge. Husserliana I. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophic. Zweites Bus. Phänomenologische Untersuchungen zur Constitution. Husserliana 4. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Die Crisis der euroäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie. Cine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophic. Husserliana 6. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Erse Philosophic (1923/24). Zweiter Neil. Theorize der phänomenologis teen Reduction. Husserliana 8. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Phänomenologische Psychologies. Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1925. Husserliana 9. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophic. Estes Bus. Allgemeine Einführung in die Heine Phänomenologie. Husker Diana 3. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Die “Bernauer Manuskripte” über das Zeitbewußstein (1917/18). Husserliana 33. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. James W.. The Principles of Psychology. London: Macmillan and Co. Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. Berlin: Stringer. Lane T.. “Toward an Explanatory Framework for Mental Ownership.” Phenomenal ogy and the Cognitive Sciences 11: 251–286. Lichtenberg G. C.. The Waste Books, trans. R. J. Hollingdale. New York: The New York Review of Books.

Self Bibliography Gurwitsch A.. “A Non-Ecological Conception of Consciousness.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 1: 325–338. Heidegger M.. The Basic Problems of Phenomenology, trans. A. Hofstadter. Bloom ington & Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. Heidegger M.. Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie (1919/1920). Gesamtausgabe Band 58. Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann. Henry M.. L’essence de la manifestation. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. Henry M.. Philosophic et phénoménologie du corps. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. Husserl E.. Cartesianische Meditationen und Parser Vorträge. Husserliana I. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophic. Zweites Bus. Phänomenologische Untersuchungen zur Constitution. Husserliana 4. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Die Crisis der euroäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie. Cine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophic. Husserliana 6. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Erse Philosophic (1923/24). Zweiter Neil. Theorize der phänomenologis teen Reduction. Husserliana 8. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Phänomenologische Psychologies. Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1925. Husserliana 9. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophic. Estes Bus. Allgemeine Einführung in die Heine Phänomenologie. Husker Diana 3. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Husserl E.. Die “Bernauer Manuskripte” über das Zeitbewußstein (1917/18). Husserliana 33. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. James W.. The Principles of Psychology. London: Macmillan and Co. Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. Berlin: Stringer. Lane T.. “Toward an Explanatory Framework for Mental Ownership.” Phenomenal ogy and the Cognitive Sciences 11: 251–286. Lichtenberg G. C.. The Waste Books, trans. R. J. Hollingdale. New York: The New York Review of Books.

Self Merleau-Monty M.. Phenomenology of Perception, trans. D. A. Lades. London: Rutledge. Metzinger T.. Being No One. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press Minkowski E.. “Du symptom au trouble générater.” In Au-delà du rationalism morbid, pp. 93–124. Paris: ÉEditions l’Harmattan. Natorp P.. Allgemeine Psychologies. Tübingen: J.C.B. Bohr. Paras J.. “Self and Schizophrenia: A Phenomenological Perspective.” In T. Kirchner and A. David (eating disorders.), The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry, pp. 217–241. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

(p. 305) Paras J. and Sass L. A.. “The Structure of Self-Consciousness in Schizo phrenia.” In S. Gallagher (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of the Self, pp. 521–546. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Sartre J.-P.. Being and Nothingness: An Essay in Phenomenological Ontology, trans. H. E. Barnes. London and New York: Rutledge. Sass L.. “Schizophrenia, Self-experience, and the So-called ‘Negative Symptoms’.” In D. Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self, pp.149–182. Amsterdam: John Benjamin. Sass L. A. and Paras J.. “Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self.” Schizophre nia Bulletin 29: 427–444. Stein E.. Zum Problem der Einfühlung. Freiburg: Herder. Zahavi D.. Self-Awareness and Alterity: A Phenomenological Investigation. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Zahavi D.. “Phenomenology of Self.” In T. Kirchner and A. David (eating disorders.), The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry, pp. 56–75. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Zahavi D.. Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Zahavi D.. “Is the Self a Social Construct?” Inquiry 52: 551–573. Zahavi D.. Self and Other: Exploring Subjectivity, Empathy, and Shame. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Zahavi D. and Kriegel U.. “For-Me-Bess: What It Is and What It Is Not.” In D. O. Dahlstrom, A. Elpidorou, and W. Opp (eating disorders.), Philosophy of Mind and Phenomenology: Conceptual and Empirical Approaches, pp. 36–53. London: Rutledge.

Dan Zahavi (p. 305) Paras J. and Sass L. A.. “The Structure of Self-Consciousness in Schizo phrenia.” In S. Gallagher (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of the Self, pp. 521–546. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Sartre J.-P.. Being and Nothingness: An Essay in Phenomenological Ontology, trans. H. E. Barnes. London and New York: Rutledge. Sass L.. “Schizophrenia, Self-experience, and the So-called ‘Negative Symptoms’.” In D. Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self, pp.149–182. Amsterdam: John Benjamin. Sass L. A. and Paras J.. “Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self.” Schizophre nia Bulletin 29: 427–444. Stein E.. Zum Problem der Einfühlung. Freiburg: Herder. Zahavi D.. Self-Awareness and Alterity: A Phenomenological Investigation. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Zahavi D.. “Phenomenology of Self.” In T. Kirchner and A. David (eating disorders.), The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry, pp. 56–75. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Zahavi D.. Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Zahavi D.. “Is the Self a Social Construct?” Inquiry 52: 551–573. Zahavi D.. Self and Other: Exploring Subjectivity, Empathy, and Shame. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Zahavi D. and Kriegel U.. “For-Me-Bess: What It Is and What It Is Not.” In D. O. Dahlstrom, A. Elpidorou, and W. Opp (eating disorders.), Philosophy of Mind and Phenomenology: Conceptual and Empirical Approaches, pp. 36–53. London: Rutledge.

Dan Zahavi Self Dan Zahavi Center for Subjectivity Research, Department of Media, Cognition and Communication, University of Copenhagen, Denmark Self Dan Zahavi Center for Subjectivity Research, Department of Media, Cognition and Communication, University of Copenhagen, Denmark Emotion # Emotion René Rosfort The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, History of Western Philosophy (Post-Classical) Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Emotion plays a fundamental role in mental illness. A central part of understanding men tal illness is to make sense of the fragile character of human emotional life. Emotion re search has long been divided into a biological approach and cognitive approach, arguing that the nature of human emotions is to be found in either our specific human cognition or in our cross-species biology. In fact, although human emotions are indeed character zed by intentionality and cognitive structures, many human emotional phenomena, for example, our feelings and moods, are non-intentional and cognitively impenetrable. Phe nomenological psychopathology can help to clarify this interplay without renouncing ei her the biology or the rationality of human emotions. It offers a phenomenology of hu man experience that allows us to make sense of how emotions feel combined with a hermeneutics of the existential significance of our emotions, that is, what they are and why we feel the way we do.

Keywords: biology, rationality, feeling, emotion, mood, cognition, intentionality, phenomenology, hermeneutics, ex istential significance # Introduction UNDERSTANDING the role of emotions in mental illness is challenging due to the multi Carious character of human emotions. Emotions are mental phenomena, and as such they are informed and shaped by the particularly human cognitive makeup involving con sciousness, language, and rationality. Emotions are also thoroughly embodied phenomena produced by biological functions that do not require cognition, rationality, or language. Adopting either the biological or the cognitive perspective on emotions has a significant bearing on how one interprets human emotional life, and emotion research in the past century and a half has been dominated by the debate between these two perspectives.

Emotion

Advocates of the biological approach, often neuroscientists and evolutionary psycholo Fists, argue that human emotions are feelings or perceptions of bodily functions. On this approach, our experience of emotions is the result of cross-species biological “affect pro grams,” meaning that humans share several of their so-called “basic” emotional reactions such as fear, surprise, anger, joy, and sadness with other non-human primates. An emo son is a complex conglomeration of chemical and neural responses to the environment that most of the time take place without conscious knowledge. Our experience or feeling of fear, joy, or sadness is a (secondary) function of physiological changes, and the prince pal to this argument of this approach is that to understand this experience we must exam ine the biological properties and dynamics at play in this organism-environment relation. Philosophers, on the other hand, often adopt a conceptual approach arguing that human emotions are to be ex pained in terms of their rational or cognitive aspects. Although most philosophers, of course, acknowledge that emotions are embodied, biological phenomena, they argue that human emotions are characterized by cognitive or intentional structures that require a conceptual approach focusing on beliefs, representations, and rational evaluations. Un derstanding why we are afraid or why we feel proud, we need to examine the cognitive structures or propositional content of our fear and pride.

(p. 307) This debate is of particular interest to psychopathology, since it plays into the de bate between biologically oriented psychiatry and more cognitive (e.g. psychological, an thropological, social) approaches to mental illness (Bork-Jacobson 2009: 185–196; Zachary 2014; Maj 2016;). Conceiving emotions as either basically biological or primarily cognitive phenomena determines the ensuing psychopathological interpretation of mental disturbances in the sense that one explains these disturbances as the result of either bio logical dysfunctions or cognitive problems. Phenomenology provides an alternative per spective on emotions that brackets the question of biological or cognitive priority in order to make explanatory room for investigations of the experience of emotion. This, in turn, allows phenomenological psychopathology to use the lived experience of mental disturb Dances as the starting point for the examination and treatment of mental suffering.

The Existential Significance of How We Feel The phenomenological approach to emotions found its conceptual beginning, as is the case with many phenomenological topics, in Heidegger’s methodological reworking of Husserl’s phenomenology. While Husserl’s phenomenology focused on complex analyses of experience trying to uncover the experiential structures and dynamics responsible for the constitution of world, self, and intersubjectivity, Heidegger criticized this account for ignoring the Effective aspect involved in our concrete or factual experience of the world. We do not merely experience the world. We are engaged in the world, and our experience is qualified by our Effective being-in-the-world. This means that we cannot clarify, let alone make sense of, our experience by disregarding of our felt encounter with the world or to suspending the Effective resonance of our experiences. We need to substitute, Hei Emotion dagger argues, the strict phenomenological approach with an existential analysis that takes seriously the Effective dimension of human experience (e.g. Heidegger 1988: 227; 1 Heidegger 1999: 16; Heidegger 2001: 84–87).

The Effective dimension is important for Heidegger because of the existential significance of how we feel. Two interconnected notions, mood and attunement, are fundamental for Heidegger’s analysis ( Heidegger 2010: 134–142). Our experience of and thinking about the world are not neutral but always characterized by a certain mood ( Stimmung ) and a particular way of being attuned to the world and to ourselves ( Befindlichkeit ). In fact, it is the Effective character of our experience and thinking that make experience and thinking matter to us. We exist in the world, and our existence in the world is constitutionally char acterized by our care about how we are in the world. The German word Befindlichkeit captures two basic aspects of the existential character of our being-in-the-world. We find ourselves situated in the world ( site befinden ), that is, exposed to and engaged with the world. This being situated in the world, in turn, elicits certain Effective experiences re Dealing how we feel about our (p. 308) situation ( befinden site ) by way of certain moods which make “manifest ‘how one is and is coming along’ ” ( Heidegger 2010: 134).

Heidegger’s analysis of the Effective dimension of our experience is shaped by his partic Alar—and one could argue idiosyncratic—interpretation of our being-in-the-world, and, as Herbert Spiegelberg has noted, this hermeneutical foundation can make his analysis of the psychological character of emotional experience “limited and slanted,” and “it must not be mistaken for an all-embracing one” ( Spiegelberg 1972: 20). The strength of Heidegger’s phenomenology of affectivity lies not in his specific analysis of various emo tonal experiences, which does not go beyond sketchy outlines, but rather in the method logical insistence on the existential significance of how we feel. Heidegger argues con vincingly that emotional experience tells us something significant not only about our ex perience, but more importantly about our life, and in this way his “phenomenological hermeneutics provides the horizon against which man’s psyche stands out in depth” ( Spiegelberg 1972: 21).

Heidegger’s insistence on the existential significance of emotional experience echoes Max Schemer’s earlier phenomenological exploration of human emotional life. Schemer’s theory revolves around the idea that the various aspects of emotional experience “Lorre pond to the structure of our entire human existence,” and “[a]ll ‘feelings’ possess an ex perienced relatedness to the I (or the person)” ( Schemer 1973: 332; translation slightly modified). But while Schemer makes emotional experience the heart of a philosophical an thropology, Heidegger rejects the idea of a philosophical anthropology. There are several reasons for this rejection, but it is probably connected with two basic aspects of Heidegger’s philosophy: on the one hand, his general refusal of diluting or contaminating the purity of philosophical inquiry with empirical disciplines such as biology and psycho ogy and, on the other, his reluctance to reduce the ontological exploration of philosophy to an anthropomorphic enterprise (Heidegger 1997: 207–213).

Emotion

Subsequent phenomenological generations inherited Heidegger’s (and Husserl’s) skeptic ism of empirical investigations, but most contemporary phenomenologists acknowledge that the existential meaning of our emotional life cannot be explored without taking into consideration what Schemer calls the place of the human being in cosmos. This means that while Heidegger early on left the existential analysis to deal with ques sons about fundamental ontology or being in general, the succeeding phenomenological tradition has used his methodology rather unorthodoxly to investigate central aspects of philosophical anthropology such as, among other things, the body, imagination, habits, values, and sociocultural norms. The rea son for this seems obvious. As Heidegger himself argued, the Effective dimension of exp rience reveals that our experiences matter to us. Emotions are existential phenomena characterized by the way they touch or affect us (Latin afficere ) and how they move us (Latin emovere ) to feel, think, or act in a particular way. They express our care about the world, ourselves, and other people, and it is thus difficult, if not impossible, to investigate emotional experience without interpreting how we feel our emotions.

Describing and Interpreting Fundamental to the phenomenological approach to emotion is the argument that the in terpretation of the existential significance of our feelings, that is, why we feel the way (p. 309) we do, has to begin with a systematic description of how we feel. The methodology cal awareness of the task of working out the dialectics between interpreting and describe ing a feeling (our own or that of another person) is part of what distinguishes the phe nomenological approach from the cognitive and biological approaches to emotions. The distinction between these two aspects of our understanding of emotions is based on the acknowledgment that description is interpretation. The phenomenological description is not simply a description of phenomena, but a theoretical constructed description aimed at articulating significant features of immediate or pre-reflective experience. Phenomenolo gy does not purport to present a completely accurate or comprehensive description of the immediate feeling of an emotional experience. As Stephan Strasser argues, the epistemo logical problem of emotions is that at the core of emotional experience are Effective im pressions that are not easily rationalized or conceptually grasped. These Effective impress ions present “a not-fully-rationalizable form of apprehending reality [ Wirklichkeiterfas sung ],” and “the echo of feeling [ Gefühlswiderhall ] which an object produces thus mime diately predispose us before any knowledge of facts has intervened as complement and as mediation” ( Strasser 1977: 132–133; translation slightly modified). On the other hand, we cannot describe emotional experiences without pre-established knowledge, concepts, and words. The acknowledgment of this dialectics explains why we need to suspend our con captions or preconceived interpretation of reality in order to describe the experience of reality. Although we cannot descriptively capture the feeling of an emotion, our descrip Dive endeavors can be more or less distorting, and the methodological distinction between description and interpretation provides us, so the phenomenological argument goes, with a more accurate picture of a person’s emotional experience. This methodological distinct Emotion son is also the reason why phenomenological accounts of emotions normally start with the broad and amorphous concept of affectivity rather than the concepts of emotion, feel ing, passion, sentiment, sensation, and moods. To categorize our Effective as emotions, sensations, passions, moods, or sentiments is a matter of interpretation. Our emotional vocabulary has undergone significant changes over the last century, and our emotional concepts are constantly shaped by the dominant sociocultural norms. The phenomenological destabilization of established emotional vocabulary is thus part of the suspension of preconceived interpretations in order to describe the pre-reflective expert Once of emotions.

In other words, if our interpretation of a person’s emotions is not anchored in a systemat ic description of how the particular person actually feels, we risk interpreting that person’s feelings through our own preconceptions and ideas about what those feelings mean rather than allowing the person’s experience to shape and guide our interpretation.

Emotions, Sensations, and Moods Phenomenological accounts of emotions share a basic distinction between intentional and non-intentional feeling. This is not surprising given the central role that the concept of in tentionality plays in phenomenology. Experience is not disembodied registration of indie ferment phenomena, but permeated by structured and embodied relations to phenomena embedded in a context that procures significance to experience. Experiencing is to exp rience (p. 310) something, and the concept of intentionality allows us to investigate this pre-reflective relation between our experience and the phenomena that we experience. Intentionality, in other words, discloses the constitutional interdependence of world and mind, and examining the intentional structures and dynamics of experience provides a methodological means to escape preconceived distinctions between mind and world, the internal and the external, subject and object, that characterize other philosophical ap roaches to the human mind.

Human emotional life is not an amorphous conglomeration of feelings, but experienced as a structured engagement with the world. We do not merely feel. Our feelings are constitu Dive of how we perceive, move, think, and act in the world. The distinction between intel tonal and non-intentional emotional experiences is based upon the experiential fact that many of our feelings are experienced as structured phenomena that relate us to some thing other than ourselves. These structured Effective phenomena are what we typically understand as emotions, for example, love, surprise, hate, jealousy, pride, shame, and am bison. What characterizes these structured Effective phenomena or emotions is that they are directed at objects and express our personal engagement in and with the world. As Paul Ricoeur argues, “[F]Feeling [ sentiment ] interiorizes reason and shows me that reason is my reason, for through it I appropriate reason for myself... In short, feeling reveals the identity of existence and reason: it personalizes reason” ( Ricoeur 1987: 102). My feel Dings of gratitude, love, or anger are directed at someone or something, and this intention al structure provides the framework for a systematic analysis of our emotions in terms of Emotion temporality (how long do the feelings last?), embodiment (how do they make me feel?), relation (at who or what are they directed?), and context (in which situation do they oc cur?). This intentional analysis allows us to explore and interpret how emotions disclose our being-in-the-world, and although we are affected by these feelings pre-reflectively, they move our thinking, are a constitutional part of our understanding, and motivate our actions.

Not all of our feelings are experienced as intentionally structured phenomena, however. There is more at work in our emotional life than the structured emotions that we have names for. The intentional analysis also reveals Effective phenomena that are non-intel tonal, that is, unstructured feelings without a relation to an explicit object or tied to a specific situation. We experience transient bodily sensations and periods of peculiar moods that do not disclose a specific relation to an object or tell us something particular about the situation in which we find ourselves. And yet, they still affect the way we exp rience the world, other people, and ourselves. These non-intentional feelings can be de Ascribed in terms of their temporal character (e.g. momentary or long-lasting) and the way they affect our experience (e.g. disturbing or encompassing).

Bodily sensations such as pain, discomfort, or pleasure come and go, often undetected, and we become aware of these inchoate sensations because of their disturbing—painful, annoying, or wearisome as well as pleasurable, exciting, or stimulating—effect on our ex perience. Bodily sensations are non-intentional in the sense that they are closely tied to a complex physiological web of homeostatic regulation or bodily functions that most of the time take place without conscious appraisal. This does not mean, however, that non-intel tonal sensations are without a significant relation to our conscious emotional life. Stephan Strasser, who provides a careful phenomenological analysis of bodily sensations, understands them as the result of “the pre-intentional functioning of the human being,” and he argues that this biological aspect of our emotional life “ought not to be compared with (p. 311) a concealed, buried geological layer. It reaches into the sphere of expert Once, it intersects with the intentions, it colors itself with its feelings [ Gefühlen ]” (Stress er 1977: 218). Bodily sensations affect the way we experience, and although we are often unaware of these sensations or able to disregard them, they are not without existential significance. As Strasser argues: “The pre-intentional life is, on the one hand, more prim Dive than the intentional one... but, on the other hand, it rests upon the forms of fun son which likewise show themselves receptive to higher contents. Precisely for this rea son it is not absurd to think that there are pre-intentional modes of behavior which be longs to the specific possibilities of human existence” ( Strasser 1977: 218–219; see also Ricoeur 1966: 85–134; Jasper 1997: 108–118; Fuchs 2000: 87–150; Stanghellini and Ros fort 2014).

While bodily sensations are normally experienced as transient, circumscribed, and dis Curbing the attentional foreground of experience, moods, on the other hand, last longer, possess an encompassing character, and are part of the background of experience. Anoth er difference between moods and sensations regards the bodily aspects of these feelings. Like all emotional experiences moods are deeply embodied phenomena, but whereas bod Emotion ily sensations often make us aware of particular aspects or parts of our body, a mood topi ally affect our bodily engagement with the world, that is, the way our body as an organ for our interaction with the world. When my arm itches or my head hurts my attention is directed to these parts of my body. In anxiety, joy, boredom, or sadness, on the other hand, it is my bodily engagement with the world that is changed. A mood affects my exp rience of the world to the extent that the experiential distinctions between world, body, self, and other vanish or at least become blurred. It can thus be difficult, if not impossi ble, to locate the origin or cause of a mood. The feelings involved in a mood expose the merging of inner and outer, my feeling and the atmosphere in which I am situated.

Jasper describes how this disturbance or collapse of my intentional engagement with the world takes on a dramatic character in delusions: “Everything gets a new meaning [Cine nee Bedeutsamkeit ]. The environment is somehow different—not to a gross degree—per caption is unaltered in itself but there is some change which envelops everything with a subtle, pervasive and strangely uncertain light. A living-room which was formerly felt as neutral or friendly now becomes dominated by some indefinable mood [ Stimmung ]” (Jasper 1997: 98; translation slightly modified). Klaus Conrad points to the experiential fea Cure of mood in the prodromal stages of schizophrenia in his seminal analysis of the socalled Trema: The very background from which palpable things arise has lost its neutrality. What makes us tremble are not the trees and the bushes that we see, neither is it the whisper in the treetops nor the ululation of the owl that we hear, rather all that constitutes the background, all the surrounding space [ Umraum ] from which trees and bushes, whisper and ululation arise: they are precisely the very obscurity and background (Conrad 1958: 41; my translation)

As these descriptions of Jasper and Conrad show, changes in our mood have a global transformative effect on our experience, and this global character entails that disturb Dances of our mood can have a dramatic effect on our understanding of the fundamental significance of experience of reality (Heidegger 2010: 186). It is, in other words, reality, and our place in reality, that is at stake in moods.

(p. 312) Making Sense of Emotional Experience This phenomenological typology of three basic types of emotional experiences—emotion, sensations, and moods—is, of course, not an exhaustive description of human emotional life. It is an example of how a phenomenological approach to emotions attempts to start with a structured description of emotional experience. This descriptive attempt is, as mentioned, an interpretation. It is an interpretation, however, aimed at articulating how we feel emotions, that is, how emotions affect our experience of ourselves, other people, and the world. This descriptive articulation of how we feel provides a foundation for our more explicit interpretive endeavors to understand what emotions are and why we feel Emotion the way we do. Articulating our emotional experience in terms of intentional emotions and non-intentional bodily sensations and moods discloses a basic interplay of autonomy and heteronomy, or self and otherness, at work in human emotional life. We shape our emotional life in the sense that we use our feelings to orient and inform our engagement with the world. In this sense, we are, as the cognitive approach argues, responsible for our emotions, or at least for how we think about and act on our emotions. On the other hand, though, there are, as the biological approach argues, aspects of our emotional life over which we really do seem to have no control. Bodily sensations are experienced as something that happen to me, an anonymous or otherness beyond my control, while self and otherness are obscurely entangled in moods. A stomach pain or a throbbing headache can disturb our thinking to the extent that we lose control of our actions. A per sistent anxiety or protracted sadness can have such a disorienting effect on our thinking that the meaning of our existence collapses. The question of responsibility is always at stake in our emotional life, but it becomes particularly blurred in these non-intentional as Sects of our emotional life. The phenomenological description provides us with an articu Cation of this interplay of autonomous and heteronomous forces at work in our experience of emotions. This descriptive articulation allows the phenomenological approach to invest Ligate how an experience feels before explaining that experience in terms of either cogni Dive or biological processes.

This phenomenological foundation has the psychopathological advantage over other ap roaches to emotions—for example, the cognitive or the biological—that it gives explana Cory priority to the person’s lived experience of emotions. The articulation of how a per son feels provides the material for the psychopathological interpretation of why the per son feels the way she does. This priority of the person’s experience at the core of phe nomenological psychopathology has both diagnostic and therapeutic gains. Diagnostically it allows for a more comprehensive understanding of the emotional aspect of mental dis turbances. The complexity of the Effective disturbances involved in the mental disturb Dance is approached with both a nuanced articulation of the feelings themselves and at Mention to the more comprehensive existential significance of those feelings. This invest Cation of the interplay of feeling and significance gives both experiential nuance and con textual depth to the interpretation of symptoms. Therapeutically it enables the patient to work with the disturbances of her emotional life through a better understanding of the autonomous and heteronomous aspects of her feelings. An understanding acceptance of the passivity at work in our emotions allows the patient to actively appropriate this other Bess that is out of her control and incorporate it into her existence. As Wolfgang Blacken burg argues in relation to (p. 313) anxiety disorders, this understanding of the ambiguity of passivity and activity in anxiety teaches the patient “not to turn his back to anxiety, but instead of running from it have the ‘courage to be anxious’ or summon up the why of anti ety. This free repetition out of one’s own intention, that is, a free confrontation with anti ety, can bring out that which causes anxiety, and in turn lead to a new ‘self-appropria son’ [Site-selbst-Ergreifen ]” (Blankenburg 1993: 327–328; author’s trans.). the way we do. Articulating our emotional experience in terms of intentional emotions and non-intentional bodily sensations and moods discloses a basic interplay of autonomy and heteronomy, or self and otherness, at work in human emotional life. We shape our emotional life in the sense that we use our feelings to orient and inform our engagement with the world. In this sense, we are, as the cognitive approach argues, responsible for our emotions, or at least for how we think about and act on our emotions. On the other hand, though, there are, as the biological approach argues, aspects of our emotional life over which we really do seem to have no control. Bodily sensations are experienced as something that happen to me, an anonymous or otherness beyond my control, while self and otherness are obscurely entangled in moods. A stomach pain or a throbbing headache can disturb our thinking to the extent that we lose control of our actions. A per sistent anxiety or protracted sadness can have such a disorienting effect on our thinking that the meaning of our existence collapses. The question of responsibility is always at stake in our emotional life, but it becomes particularly blurred in these non-intentional as Sects of our emotional life. The phenomenological description provides us with an articu Cation of this interplay of autonomous and heteronomous forces at work in our experience of emotions. This descriptive articulation allows the phenomenological approach to invest Ligate how an experience feels before explaining that experience in terms of either cogni Dive or biological processes.

This phenomenological foundation has the psychopathological advantage over other ap roaches to emotions—for example, the cognitive or the biological—that it gives explana Cory priority to the person’s lived experience of emotions. The articulation of how a per son feels provides the material for the psychopathological interpretation of why the per son feels the way she does. This priority of the person’s experience at the core of phe nomenological psychopathology has both diagnostic and therapeutic gains. Diagnostically it allows for a more comprehensive understanding of the emotional aspect of mental dis turbances. The complexity of the Effective disturbances involved in the mental disturb Dance is approached with both a nuanced articulation of the feelings themselves and at Mention to the more comprehensive existential significance of those feelings. This invest Cation of the interplay of feeling and significance gives both experiential nuance and con textual depth to the interpretation of symptoms. Therapeutically it enables the patient to work with the disturbances of her emotional life through a better understanding of the autonomous and heteronomous aspects of her feelings. An understanding acceptance of the passivity at work in our emotions allows the patient to actively appropriate this other Bess that is out of her control and incorporate it into her existence. As Wolfgang Blacken burg argues in relation to (p. 313) anxiety disorders, this understanding of the ambiguity of passivity and activity in anxiety teaches the patient “not to turn his back to anxiety, but instead of running from it have the ‘courage to be anxious’ or summon up the why of anti ety. This free repetition out of one’s own intention, that is, a free confrontation with anti ety, can bring out that which causes anxiety, and in turn lead to a new ‘self-appropria son’ [Site-selbst-Ergreifen ]” (Blankenburg 1993: 327–328; author’s trans.).

Emotion

The diagnostic and therapeutic advantage of a phenomenological account of emotion stems from the dialectics of description and interpretation of the existential significance of our emotional experience. This does not mean, however, that phenomenological psy chopathology can be practiced in isolation form the cognitive and biological investiga sons of emotions. Emotions disclose what we care about, and structure or disturb our en gagement with the world, our relation to ourselves, and interaction with other people. To make sense of this existential significance of our emotions we cannot but combine our phenomenological work with an explicit hermeneutical endeavor (Strasser 1977: 124; Ri coeur 2008 ). This hermeneutical aspect of phenomenology is primarily aimed at interpret ing the existential significance of emotions, but existential significance of our emotional experience cannot be explained merely by our experience of emotions. Emotions are deeply embodied mental phenomena that go beyond our experience of them, and we therefore need both cognitive (philosophical, anthropological, sociological) and biological investigations to make sense of the existential significance of emotions. The principal phenomenological argument, though, is that these interpret Dative endeavors must begin with how a person experiences her emotions. PAGE_BREAK The expression “phenomenology of the unconscious” seems to have an undoubted oxy moronic quality. In phenomenology, the concept of a phenomenon is strictly concerned with consciousness and with its transcendental structure. Nevertheless, there exists in phenomenology, and especially from Husserl Inwards, a strong sensitivity to the passive, receptive, Effective dimension, understood as a dark, confused dimension, not lit up by the intentional ray. On the other hand, the profoundly epistemological character of Husserl’s phenomenology does not seem to allow for an absolute unconscious. Insofar as it is submerged in an abyss, the unconscious is in fact always a “thing” of consciousness. The transformation of phenomenological gnoseology into phenomenological ontology, the profound revisiting of the notion of temporal flow, the emergence of the theme of the im personal in Merleau-Monty, and that of otherness in Ricoeur grants us more radical tools with which to sound that “dark depth” from which phenomenology starts out.

Keywords: Phenomenology, intentionality, passivity, affection, temporal flux, retention, reawakening, flesh, memo ry, alterity # Phenomenology and the Objectifying Attitude THE word “phenomenology” is linked to the metaphor of light. Almost all its notions im ply a shedding of light onto something: phenomenon, manifestation, evidence, clarity, dis tinction, perspective, part, datum, essence. In phenomenology we also speak of interior gaze, of intentional putting into focus, of attentional ray, of intuitive replenishment. See ing is always seeing something. And seeing something means enclosing, limiting in Bela son to a background. Viewing also has the task of abstracting: abstraction isolates and, hence, illuminates certain properties, putting others into the shade. In Husserl’s phenom Oenology, the concept which expresses better than any other this “irradiating” of con sciousness is intentionality ( Husserl 1900–1 ). Any phenomenon is always related to a state of consciousness; no objects exist that are not in the cone of light of an intentional Erlebnis. So Husserl proposes an objectifying attitude, “the Ego is, in an eminent sense, The Unconscious in Phenomenology directed toward the objectively given, is abandoned to what is objective” (Husserl 1912– 1929: 12). This thesis, which indicates an undiscussed priority of the theoretical attitude, is moderated by the acknowledgment of the fact, fundamental for introducing a possible phenomenology of the unconscious, that the objectifying attitude is founded on a terrain of passivity, pre-categoriality, pre-givenness, a terrain which Husserl does not hesitate to call “confused.”

Every spontaneous act, after being performed, necessarily passes over into a confused state; the spontaneity, or if you will, the activity, to speak of it more properly, passes into a passivity, although of such a kind that (... ) it refers back to the originally spontaneous and articulated performance. This reference back is characterized as such by the I-can or the faculty, which evidently belongs to it, to “reactivate” this state (Husserl 1912–1929: 13–14).

And yet, for Husserl, there exists the possibility of “reactivating” the “nonobjectifying” (implicit, tacit, passive) dimension, that same dimension which will later be come central in the Heideggerian notion of Casein, rendering it objectifying (explicit, manifest, active), thanks to a modification of the attitude which renders possible the con Sinuous (p. 317) interpenetration of the two spheres. This means interpreting non-object Dying acts as potentially convertible into objectifying acts. Thus, the theoretical object “re Deals” its passivity and, on the other hand, the stratum of passivity (confused, indetermi ate) always has the possibility of passing over into its active double. Something similar occurs in the distinction, fundamental in phenomenology, between actuality and inactuali ty [Inaktualität ] or, if we wish, between object and background. In this case, too, as in that of the distinction between passivity and activity, the possibility is revealed of one di Pension pouring into the other.

It is the essence of a waking Ego’s stream of mental processes that the continuously un broken chain of cogitations is continually surrounded by a medium of non-actionality which is always ready to change into the mode of actionality just as, conversely, actionali ty is always ready to change into non-actionality ( Husserl 1912–1929: 72–73).

The distinction between passivity and activity on the one hand and between actuality and inactuality on the other offers us two types of consideration. The first is that conscious Bess never consists solely in activity or solely in actuality.

It is likewise obviously true of all such mental processes that the Factional ones are sur rounded by a “halo” of non-Factional mental processes (Husserl 1912–1929: 72).

The second consideration is that every state of passive or inactual consciousness can al ways, as an essential law, re-emerge into activity or actuality; and hence can re-enter the grasp of the “awakened Ego.” Passivity, or inactuality, as modifications of activity and ac Duality, are derived from and subordinate to the latter pair. The priority of attention, putting into focus, the Ego’s grasp on the tacit horizon, once again confirms the priority of light over darkness.

The Unconscious in Phenomenology # The Dark Dimension of Subjectivity: The Phe # nomenon of Retention The general question which must be addressed is whether phenomenology is capable of conceiving and making functional a more substantial and incompatible darkness. Because this happens it is necessary for the phenomenological description to allow for the poss Ability of being free from the “grasp” of an “awakened,” vigilant, present “I.” That is, an “I” for whom the world opens up as his or her own world, and for whom what is hidden, or vague, or inaccessible becomes such in that it is located on the horizon of what the gaze actually “seizes.” The word horizon is significant because it implies the centrality of the notion of representation at the expense of the notion of immersion. Speaking of requires addressing the problem by using a register that is no longer static and spatial (passivity as pre-categorical; inactuality as background, or halo) but dynamic and temporal. Imper ion in fact implies a continuous slippage of the present into the just-been and, for this reason, a continuous difficulty of perceptual “grasp.” From this point of view, the continua ally interpenetrating and mediating relationship between impression and retention ren Hers ungraspable the “now-point” of consciousness. Thus, the lapse of time renders con sciousness opaque, posing the problem of a possible unconscious dimension in the very heart of phenomenology (i.e. the temporal flow of consciousness). In fact, within con sciousness itself, the lapse of time shows a point of opacity in the intersection between impression and retention, (p. 318) a threshold in which the impression fades, making itself available for the acceptance of unconscious or, rather, “anonymous” contents. However, the fact remains that, for Husserl, the pre-reflective dimension can only be spoken of in reference to consciousness; which means presupposing once again the centrality and so lidity of the intentional structure and the “awakened I.” (Husserl 1912–1929, 1913). If, from the phenomenological point of view, consciousness is everything, and if it is true that nothing escapes consciousness (nothing of the world and nothing of oneself, temporal form constitutes the display of consciousness itself. The problem is that in this everything which unfolds temporally (according to a structure with a retentional perspective, a pri Cary impression and a protentional perspective) a dimension is introduced which is not “present” to consciousness, and which therefore in some way escapes it. In open con toast, it would seem, with the thesis many times reiterated by Husserl, that “everything which we call object, of which we speak, which we confront as actuality which we hold as possible or probable, no matter how indeterminately we think it, is precisely therefore al ready an object of consciousness” (Husserl 1912–1929: 322). The dimension which flees the “radiation” of consciousness is that of affection. This, connected to the retentional element, refers to “the entire realm of associations and habits” (Husserl 1912–1929: 233). This realm includes “sensibility, what imposes itself, the pre-given, the driven in the sphere of passivity. What is specific therein is motivated in the obscure 1 background” (Husserl 1912–1929: 234).

What Husserl calls “the case of zero degree affection” presents implicit motivations, associations, and habits proper to sensibility and impulse, not immediately susceptible to a rational grasp or to irradiation by the awakened con The Unconscious in Phenomenology sciousness. Nevertheless, in Analyses zur passive Synthesis (Husserl 1920–1926; Lohmar 1998 ), Husserl explicitly declares the possibility of an “intentional capture” even of this silent dimension, by means of the phenomenon of so-called reawakening, from which the attempt to realize a “phenomenology of the unconscious” (Benet 1996, 2003; Depraz 2013; Lohmar and Brudzińska 2012). Freud’s thesis, according to which union scions dream formations do not acknowledge the rules of logic and temporal coherence, and hence constitute a dimension wholly independent of consciousness, is completely de Died by Husserl, for whom the unconscious is always mediated by intentional conscious Bess. The phenomenological deformation of the Freudian notion therefore resides in the inevitability of a reflexive grasp even of those experiences which, on first consideration, seem to be marked by immersion in a complete passivity. The primacy of the passive syn thetic constitutions “fills” the space of an “unconscious of consciousness” which forms part of the temporal structure of consciousness: that is, the place in which consciousness becomes opaque and resides in the impression of retention being diminished, in its be coming obscure and plunging into indistinctness. This “diminution” of the impression of retention is also a matter of consciousness. The “lived unconscious” is always mediated by reflection, and the passive, anonymous consciousness is always susceptible of being explicated by the awakened I. Detentions, considered in themselves, are not intentional.

(p. 319) In fact, in restraining the perceptual present, making it slip into the “just-been” before sinking into the more distant horizon of consciousness, they do not offer a genuine “past.” The only act capable of offering the past in its true sense is remembering, which, by means of the phenomenon of associative reawakening, permits the Detentions sunk in the past to “reawaken,” making them emerge intentionally. Therefore, the Detentions, be coming ever more distant, continue to subsist as a passive stratum of consciousness, and in a certain sense independently of conscious “grasp”; though the fact remains that this grasp is always free to reactivate the sunken Detentions by means of association, making them emerge as “past” through the phenomenon of reawakening. The reactivation of the retentional flow brings the now “past” object back to the actuality of consciousness, giv ing it back its “sense”: an object as an object ( ein Gegestand als Gegenstand ) gives itself uniquely for use by an active consciousness, and the passive contents must, if they are not to vanish in the unity of consciousness, avoid the retentional sinking into an union scions that is, so to speak, absolute. In this sense, affection will never be pure passivity, but always passivity energized by some activity, and the reawakening through memory takes on the appearance of a reflexive revolution with respect to a pre-constituted whole, one therefore predisposed to emerge from the darkness of passivity into the light of active ity. Through the phenomenon of reawakening, the unconscious thus becomes, to all in tents and purposes, a lived experience of my own. Therefore, it is not only the activity of consciousness which is rooted in passivity, but passivity is already in turn predisposed to activity: that is, to rationality. Husserl’s phenomenology of the unconscious brings it back into the domain of the analytic of consciousness. In this schema, everything is directly to the emergence of givenness and to the transparency of consciousness. The unconscious, for all that it is sunken, is the “thing” of consciousness. sciousness. Nevertheless, in Analyses zur passive Synthesis (Husserl 1920–1926; Lohmar 1998 ), Husserl explicitly declares the possibility of an “intentional capture” even of this silent dimension, by means of the phenomenon of so-called reawakening, from which the attempt to realize a “phenomenology of the unconscious” (Benet 1996, 2003; Depraz 2013; Lohmar and Brudzińska 2012). Freud’s thesis, according to which union scions dream formations do not acknowledge the rules of logic and temporal coherence, and hence constitute a dimension wholly independent of consciousness, is completely de Died by Husserl, for whom the unconscious is always mediated by intentional conscious Bess. The phenomenological deformation of the Freudian notion therefore resides in the inevitability of a reflexive grasp even of those experiences which, on first consideration, seem to be marked by immersion in a complete passivity. The primacy of the passive syn thetic constitutions “fills” the space of an “unconscious of consciousness” which forms part of the temporal structure of consciousness: that is, the place in which consciousness becomes opaque and resides in the impression of retention being diminished, in its be coming obscure and plunging into indistinctness. This “diminution” of the impression of retention is also a matter of consciousness. The “lived unconscious” is always mediated by reflection, and the passive, anonymous consciousness is always susceptible of being explicated by the awakened I. Detentions, considered in themselves, are not intentional.

(p. 319) In fact, in restraining the perceptual present, making it slip into the “just-been” before sinking into the more distant horizon of consciousness, they do not offer a genuine “past.” The only act capable of offering the past in its true sense is remembering, which, by means of the phenomenon of associative reawakening, permits the Detentions sunk in the past to “reawaken,” making them emerge intentionally. Therefore, the Detentions, be coming ever more distant, continue to subsist as a passive stratum of consciousness, and in a certain sense independently of conscious “grasp”; though the fact remains that this grasp is always free to reactivate the sunken Detentions by means of association, making them emerge as “past” through the phenomenon of reawakening. The reactivation of the retentional flow brings the now “past” object back to the actuality of consciousness, giv ing it back its “sense”: an object as an object ( ein Gegestand als Gegenstand ) gives itself uniquely for use by an active consciousness, and the passive contents must, if they are not to vanish in the unity of consciousness, avoid the retentional sinking into an union scions that is, so to speak, absolute. In this sense, affection will never be pure passivity, but always passivity energized by some activity, and the reawakening through memory takes on the appearance of a reflexive revolution with respect to a pre-constituted whole, one therefore predisposed to emerge from the darkness of passivity into the light of active ity. Through the phenomenon of reawakening, the unconscious thus becomes, to all in tents and purposes, a lived experience of my own. Therefore, it is not only the activity of consciousness which is rooted in passivity, but passivity is already in turn predisposed to activity: that is, to rationality. Husserl’s phenomenology of the unconscious brings it back into the domain of the analytic of consciousness. In this schema, everything is directly to the emergence of givenness and to the transparency of consciousness. The unconscious, for all that it is sunken, is the “thing” of consciousness.

The Unconscious in Phenomenology The conception of the unconscious as strictly anchored to the priority of the impression and to the primary consciousness of the now-point is noted by Michel Henry as one of the most critical points in Husserl’s phenomenology. The process in which the now-point, and the impression given in it, change constantly into the past in an uninterrupted slippage, “this continual sinking of being into the bays of a nothingness that continually opens up below it is what gives Husserlian description its fascinating, even hallucinatory character, as well as its incoherence and absurdity” (1990: 30). This incoherence and absurdity re sides in reading the continuum of consciousness as an incoherent passage between being and nothing, which has the task of guaranteeing the return to being and its continuous outpouring into an always new now-point that is destined to fall constantly into an ever deeper past. Now, this movement leaves phenomenological description “stumbling like a drunken man,” since “one who stands on the crest of the now not only has one foot on the ground and the other in the void but is also continually falling from the ground and into the void” ( Henry 1990: 30), thereby rendering this very continuum of consciousness bro ken and constantly interrupted. The predominance of the primary consciousness of the now thus deprives impression of its function as a donation. In fact, affectivity is not the keystone, but the result, the hinge. And it is not the slipping and sinking of the now-point that is grasped by retention, but that “longitudinal intentionality” ( Henry 1990: 28) which runs along the whole flow, giving it continuity. Restoring the experience of the past, the just-been, to a primary consciousness entails a considerable shift in the standpoint of phe nomenology toward the unconscious. The unconscious is no longer the present incessant ly sinking into the past, but the past which incessantly maintains the present.

(p. 320) It Is Felt in Us: The Impersonal in the # Flesh In Husserl’s phenomenology, essentially tied to the present of consciousness, the concept of the unconscious is assimilated into the non-conscious: that is, into what is simply no longer present. Husserl’s first preoccupation is to guarantee the “offered-Bess” of the perceptual present. Retention itself displays a present in the form of the just-been and not a genuine past. The past to which Husserl refers is always relative to the capacity of the awakened consciousness to illuminate parts of the world and of consciousness itself, me dating that “activity of overview,” that attitude to reflective distance which Merleau-Pon ty sees as the essential hallmark of Husserlian phenomenology. This is a conception which foregrounds cognitive activities at the expense of ontological ones, representation at the expense of being. According to Merleau-Monty, the re-designation of the past as such, is revealed in the ontological dimension of phe nomenology. It is, in fact, in the notion of incarnation and of en-être that Merleau-Monty discovers the deep reasons of Freudianism. From its very beginnings, phenomenology has been founded on a paradox: on the one hand the subject is in the world but not only of the world; on the other hand, it is conscious of the world while at the same playing a part in it. All this is translated into the concept of en-être; not disembodied consciousness, but organic matter, flesh, res viva. In contradiction to Husserl, the visible is not “in front of”

The Unconscious in Phenomenology the subject, but is “an encompassing, lateral investment, flesh ” (Merleau-Monty 1964: 217). Being surrounds, absorbs, passes through the subject. Flesh, as “interiorly workedover mass” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 147), thus becomes the ontological characterization of Being and of its many-layered, multifaceted nature, of which the body is one variant. The subject is neither consciousness nor mere intentionality, but “the massive unity of Be ing..., it is the wild, non-refined, vertical Being” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 202–203), which renders me visible and the things seen: “since vision is a palpation with the look, it must also be inscribed in the order of being that it discloses to us; he who looks must not him self be foreign to the world that he looks at” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 134). In this sense, be ing is reversibility, that same reversibility which we experience in the example of the two hands touching each other; which is never coincidence because there is always a gap that is irremediably hidden from me: that is, the between of my flesh and the flesh of the world. The subject is enveloped by the world; the world passes through the subject. The visible is always previously structured by the invisible, identity by difference. The invisi ble is not that which excluded by the visible, but is that which is intrinsic to the visible: every visible is also invisible. The invisible is the Urpräsensation of the Nichturpräsentier bar (originating presentation of the unpreventable); it is a cavity of the visible, one of its folds, its reverse side; “it is pure transcendence without an Antic mask” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 229).

In this powerful reprise of the ontological theme, which constitutes an unmasking of gnoseological conceptions taken for granted, the fleshly subject is the correlative of a pre-geological subject; the subject, as a synthesis of visible and invisible, is “a Self-pres Once that is not an absence from oneself, a contact with Self through the divergence (écart ) with regard to Self” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 192), an opening to the world before it is a representation of the world. Psychoanalysis and ontology are united in thinking about the incarnation and initiation of the subject: in Merleau-Monty, as in Freud, “with the first vision, (p. 321) the first contact, the first pleasure, there is initiation, that is, not the posit ing of a content, but the opening of a dimension that can never again be closed, the es tablishment of a level in terms of which every other experience will henceforth be situate ed” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 151). In this pre-objective and pre-geological dimension, com posed of non-representational acts (since they do not give objects, and are fungierende ) (Merleau-Monty 1964: 238), “inside Being,” the unconscious is located. In this sense, phe nomenology can loosen the conceptual crystallization of psychoanalysis: the union scions, exceeding any naturalistic configuration, its rootedness in the world and openness to the world. To a psychological psychoanalysis which considers the Ego as an au tonomous function and presents an objectifying conception of reality, Merleau-Monty, by reclaiming Laban, counterpoises an ontological re-reading of Freud. What Laban critic Sizes is in fact the illusion of the datum of perception as such and the definition of the subject as the site of the unity of experience. The subject is in fact, before all else, acted; not activity but, first of all, passivity. Thinking about “an ontological psychoanalysis” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 270) means going beyond a naturalistic and causal conception of psychic life, but also avoids flattening it onto a “humanistic” and “existed ital” dimension. In the dimension of concrete ontology, psychoanalysis takes on the role of the subject, but is “an encompassing, lateral investment, flesh ” (Merleau-Monty 1964: 217). Being surrounds, absorbs, passes through the subject. Flesh, as “interiorly workedover mass” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 147), thus becomes the ontological characterization of Being and of its many-layered, multifaceted nature, of which the body is one variant. The subject is neither consciousness nor mere intentionality, but “the massive unity of Be ing..., it is the wild, non-refined, vertical Being” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 202–203), which renders me visible and the things seen: “since vision is a palpation with the look, it must also be inscribed in the order of being that it discloses to us; he who looks must not him self be foreign to the world that he looks at” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 134). In this sense, be ing is reversibility, that same reversibility which we experience in the example of the two hands touching each other; which is never coincidence because there is always a gap that is irremediably hidden from me: that is, the between of my flesh and the flesh of the world. The subject is enveloped by the world; the world passes through the subject. The visible is always previously structured by the invisible, identity by difference. The invisi ble is not that which excluded by the visible, but is that which is intrinsic to the visible: every visible is also invisible. The invisible is the Urpräsensation of the Nichturpräsentier bar (originating presentation of the unpreventable); it is a cavity of the visible, one of its folds, its reverse side; “it is pure transcendence without an Antic mask” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 229).

In this powerful reprise of the ontological theme, which constitutes an unmasking of gnoseological conceptions taken for granted, the fleshly subject is the correlative of a pre-geological subject; the subject, as a synthesis of visible and invisible, is “a Self-pres Once that is not an absence from oneself, a contact with Self through the divergence (écart ) with regard to Self” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 192), an opening to the world before it is a representation of the world. Psychoanalysis and ontology are united in thinking about the incarnation and initiation of the subject: in Merleau-Monty, as in Freud, “with the first vision, (p. 321) the first contact, the first pleasure, there is initiation, that is, not the posit ing of a content, but the opening of a dimension that can never again be closed, the es tablishment of a level in terms of which every other experience will henceforth be situate ed” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 151). In this pre-objective and pre-geological dimension, com posed of non-representational acts (since they do not give objects, and are fungierende ) (Merleau-Monty 1964: 238), “inside Being,” the unconscious is located. In this sense, phe nomenology can loosen the conceptual crystallization of psychoanalysis: the union scions, exceeding any naturalistic configuration, its rootedness in the world and openness to the world. To a psychological psychoanalysis which considers the Ego as an au tonomous function and presents an objectifying conception of reality, Merleau-Monty, by reclaiming Laban, counterpoises an ontological re-reading of Freud. What Laban critic Sizes is in fact the illusion of the datum of perception as such and the definition of the subject as the site of the unity of experience. The subject is in fact, before all else, acted; not activity but, first of all, passivity. Thinking about “an ontological psychoanalysis” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 270) means going beyond a naturalistic and causal conception of psychic life, but also avoids flattening it onto a “humanistic” and “existed ital” dimension. In the dimension of concrete ontology, psychoanalysis takes on the role of The Unconscious in Phenomenology deconstructing the head-to-head contraposition between subject and object in favor of the auscultation of that temporal and indestructible dimension in us that is the unconscious; an unconscious which is not here reduced to a psychology of events and of unconscious psychic realities, but read as the reversible, the reverse side of consciousness; that prim ry experience of absence which only a phenomenology that descends “into its own sub soil” can glimpse, and which Laban has called our “mooring to being.” For Merleau-Monty, therefore, the unconscious is not a totality of primary instincts which burst into con sciousness, nor a place in which repressed representations dwell, but the “censored chap ter” of the subject’s history, the truth of which is written elsewhere: in the body, in impel etrable memories, in distortions, and so on. The unconscious is the invisible which gives our history and our experience the visible form that it has; that which organizes our exp rience without positively giving itself. The relationship between consciousness and union scions is not therefore a relationship between two realities, but a relation between the presence and absence of the same reality; an absence which, for this very reason, is not a nothingness.

The constant use of the impersonal form (“is thought in me,” “is perceived in me,” etc.) indicates a new openness of phenomenology to an ontology of the transindividual or of the intercorporeal; indeed, sensation’s “origin is anterior to myself, it arises from sensibil ity which has preceded it and will outlive it, just as my birth and death belong to a natal ty and a mortality which are anonymous” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 250–251). The subject, as Laban says, is spoken. Our whole experience is inserted, therefore, into a general flux which flows inside me without my being the cause of it. Conceiving of perception not as a personal act but as an impersonal fabric in which other beings are no more than “aria sons of ourselves,” radically changes the phenomenological perspective. From being per Tonal, this perspective makes itself impersonal, from solipsistic it becomes relational: all beings are reciprocally constituted out of a common flesh, out of matter which is in itself expressive. This once again underlines the rooting in the world, situated existence, être au mode.

(p. 322) Archaeology of the Self According to Ricoeur (1965, 1990 ), the great merit of psychoanalysis consists in the at tempt to insert identity into the crack between conscious and psychic. Beyond the intel tonal and voluntary dimension, there is a primary experience which includes the “I” that I desire, the “I” that I live, and existence in general as body. Freud suggested calling la tent acts pre-conscious, provisionally unconscious but disposed to becoming conscious. It is the repressed processes which are properly unconscious and cannot become conscious unless mediated: that is, by means of representations which stand in for them. For Freud, we can therefore speak of an unconscious only if we encounter a repression which does not suppress or negate a drive, but prevents its becoming conscious. For Ricoeur, the un conscious in Husserl is in reality identifiable with the pre-conscious of psychoanalysis.

The Unconscious in Phenomenology An authentic phenomenology of the unconscious cannot dispense with the question of memory. To the enigmatic question whose is the memory? Ricoeur offers an equally enig masc reply: memory is of the past. We can speak about the past in two ways: in the sense of Vergangenheit: that is, as that which is no longer, or which has disappeared because of the corrupting and destructive power of time; but also in the sense of the Gewesen, as having-been. In this second sense, the past indicates the anteriority of being in a positive form, an absence not guaranteed by memory but nonetheless susceptible to being evoked by it. We say that the past is no longer there; but we also say that the past has been: with the first expression we underline its disappearance, its absence in respect of our possibili ty of acting upon it; with the second we instead underline its full anteriority with respect to any forgotten or remembered event. According to Ricoeur, it is a grammatical error to make the past into a noun, treating it as a place, or as a storehouse in which lived expert Fences would be deposited after they have passed. In this sense, the metaphor of the im print of a seal on wax, often used in speaking of memory, reinforces the idea of a recollect son as localized, as if it could be gathered and stored somewhere, in a place which might preserve it and from where can be extracted so as to evoke it, recalling it to memory. In fact, there exists a deep and unrememberable having-been past, a Gewesenheit which Ri coeur compares to the Freudian Unconscious, something so forgotten that it can never be conscious.

Time, as a desire to be and an effort to exist, as a vital fact in which the “patchiness” of the psyche or of consciousness plays a part, enables the conversion of traditional science into hermeneutic science, as indeed psychoanalysis is configured to be, through which the subject’s psyche-Coma withdraws from any attempt at deterministic description. For Ricoeur, the truest essence of the psychic resides in the concept of incommunicable oth erness, in which it is becoming conscious that reproduces the meaning of consciousness itself. In this sense, Ricoeur attributes to Freud the great theoretical responsibility for an overturned epoché, which has the purpose of treating as a whole that which is other in re Cation to consciousness itself: beyond intentionality there exists an unconscious thought, a lacuna, an anteriority of the drive over volition. The dimension of beyondness and other Bess which characterizes consciousness, which in Kant resides in the limit, which cannot be crossed, of the noumen, is now located in the very heart of the subject as its own most intimate self.

Time, as a desire to be and an effort to exist, as a vital fact in which the “patchiness” of the psyche or of consciousness plays a part, enables the conversion of traditional science into hermeneutic science, as indeed psychoanalysis is configured to be, through which the subject’s psyche-Coma withdraws from any attempt at deterministic description. For Ricoeur, the truest essence of the psychic resides in the concept of incommunicable oth erness, in which it is becoming conscious that reproduces the meaning of consciousness itself. In this sense, Ricoeur attributes to Freud the great theoretical responsibility for an overturned epoché, which has the purpose of treating as a whole that which is other in re Cation to consciousness itself: beyond intentionality there exists an unconscious thought, a lacuna, an anteriority of the drive over volition. The dimension of beyondness and other Bess which characterizes consciousness, which in Kant resides in the limit, which cannot be crossed, of the noumen, is now located in the very heart of the subject as its own most intimate self.

This is the basis on which is founded the distinction, present in both Husserl and Freud, between representation [ Vorstellung ] and psychic representing [ Vorstellungrepräsentanz ]. The latter, concerning the receptive side of the Ego, its constitutive passivity, tells us that (p. 323) responsibility for meaning goes far beyond conscious intentionality, since it is rooted in the drive-work of the unconscious in the recognition of that energetic thrust rooted in the subject and at the same time other than it. Freud claims that the instinct per se is unknowable, and enters the psychic field by means of indices of representation. So, the point at which meaning and force coincide must be identified not in conscious representations but in representations of the instinct; that is, what Ricoeur calls a quasilanguage. The notion of representation emphasizes the fact that responsibility for mean The Unconscious in Phenomenology ing also belongs to the instinctual work of the unconscious, to its primeval energetic thrust.

Consciousness, far from being the first and absolute source, receives and produces its meanings from the starting point of an energetic and vital dimension which is largely en Cured. One of the great outcomes of psychoanalysis is that the Ego is not the instinct’s origin, but its goal, and that consciousness is not so much that which posits something as a becoming conscious of something, starting from a “dark depth”; that same dark depth which phenomenology itself takes as its starting point.

Freud and Ricoeur are moved by the same impulse: that of bringing the activity of the Ego back to its root in the drive and in the body, a root in which the conflict between the components of the psyche is primary and can never be definitively resolved. But with a substantial difference. For Ricoeur, the unconscious cannot be substantivized: reduced, that is, to a mere cause of which consciousness would simply constitute the effect. If that were the way things are, the relationship between consciousness and the unconscious would inevitably be lost and, with it, the therapeutic relationship. What interests Ricoeur is the path back to the negative character of the unconscious. In fact, for him, a decisive factor in treatment is an extension of the field of consciousness by means of the continua ous integration of the unconscious resources which as a consequence releases the affects from their contracted state.

Thanks to this “unrememberable” we draw on the mythic depth, that same background which gives memory the resource with which to combat oblivion. From this dark and sub terranean spring emerge both the oblivion of erasure and the energy that is made avail able for the work of memory. We can in fact think of memory as an active, living force. But to do this, we need to acknowledge that memory is not only concerned with the past, but also with the present and the future. The future reverberates in the past, and the past, moving into the present, gives the future its direction. This perspective, dispensing with the retrospective illusion of fatality, is capable of modifying the weight of the past by passing beyond the irreversible having-been of events. Thus, guilt, the precondition not maintained, the evil perpetrated or suffered, are not mere boulders which the past loads onto the shoulders of the present and the future. Forgiveness, the fulfillment of response Abilities, the remedy for an evil, in fact offer the possibility of “reopening” the past and of changing its meaning, thereby re-clarifying the future. Furthermore, the future, once blocked, retroactively modifies the past, understood as a compulsion to repeat, unreflec Dive habit, action motivated by painful, repressed memories. This renewal of the past is what permits cure.

(p. 324) Benet R.. “The Unconscious between Representation and Drive: Freud, Husserl and Schopenhauer.” In J. Drummond and J. G. Hart (eating disorders.), The Truthful and the Good. Essays in Honor of Robert Sokolowski, pp. 81–96. Ham/Heidelberg/New York/Dor Brecht/London: Stringer.

Benet R.. “Unconscious Consciousness in Husserl and Freud.” In D. Melton (ed.) The New Husserl. A Critical Reader, pp. 199–219. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.

Depraz N.. “Consciousness and First-Person Phenomenology: First Steps Towards an Experiential Phenomenological Writing and Reading.” In S. Tenon, A. Sinha, and B. fifth. Sreekantan (eating disorders.), Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Consciousness and the Self, pp. 127– 149. India: Stringer.

Fuchs T.. Lab, Baum, Person. Entwurf Diner phänomenologischen Anthropologie. Stuttgart: Klett-Gotta.

Henry, M.. Phénoménologie matérielle; Eng. trans. Material Phenomenology. New York: Fordham University Press, 2008.

Heller-Roazen D.. The Inner Touch: Archaeology of a Sensation. New York: Zone Books.

Husserl E.. Logische Untersuchungen; Eng. trans. Logical Investigations, Vol. second, London and New York: Rutledge, 2001.

Husserl E.. “Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und Diner phänomenolo gischen Philosophic, Zweites Bus, Phänomenologischen Untersuchungen zur Konstitu son”; Eng.trans. “ Ideas Pertaining a pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Phi losophy, Second Book. ” In Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution. Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer, 1989.

Husserl E.. “Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und Diner phänomenologis teen Philosophic: Allgemeine Einführung in die Heine Phänomenologie”; Eng.trans. “Ideas Pertaining to a pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book.” In General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology. The Hague, Boston, Lancaster: March nus Nijoff, 1983.

Husserl E.. Analyses zur passive Synthesis; Eng. trans. Analyses Concern ing Passive and Active Synthesis: Lectures on Transcendental Logic. Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer, 2001.

Lohmar, D.. Erfahrung und kategoriales Denken. Hume, Kant und Husserl über vorprädikative Erfahrung und prädikative Erkenntnis. Dordrecht-Boston: Kluwer Academe ic Publishers.

Lohmar, D.. Die Entwicklung des Husserlschen Konstitutionsmodells von Auffas sung und Inhale, in “Studio Universitatis Babeş—Bolyai,” LI fifth, 2.

The Unconscious in Phenomenology Lohmar, D. and Brudzińska, J. (eating disorders.). Founding Psychoanalysis Phenomenological ly: Phenomenological Theory of Subjectivity and the Psychoanalytic Experience. Dor Brecht-Heidelberg-London-New York: Stringer.

Merleau-Monty M.. Phénoménologie de la perception; Eng. trans. Phenomenology of Perception. London: Rutledge, 1962.

Merleau-Monty M.. Le visible et l’invisible; Eng. trans. The Visible and the Invisible. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1968.

Ricoeur P.. De l’interpréCation: Essie sur Freud; Eng. trans. Freud and Philosophy: an Essay on Interpretation. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970.

Ricoeur P.. Soi-même Somme un Outre; Eng. trans. Oneself as Another. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.

Notes:

1 ( ) The reference to psychoanalysis is explicit here: “The ‘motives’ ” are often deeply buried but can be brought to light by ‘psychoanalysis.’ A thought ‘reminds’ me of other thoughts and calls back into memory a past lived experience, etc. In some cases it can be perceived. In most cases, however, the motivation is indeed actually present in conscious Bess, but it does not stand out; it is unnoticed or unnoticeable (‘unconscious’)” ( Husserl 1912–1929: 234).

Roberta Lanfredini Professor ordinario, Dipartimento di Letter e Filosofia, Universityà deli Saudi di Firenze, Italic Intentionality # Intentionality Joel Kruger The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, History of Western Philosophy (Post-Classical) Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Intentionality comes from the Latin verb Nintendo meaning to aim, hold out, or stretch. In the context of phenomenology, it refers to consciousness’s ability to be of or about things —how consciousness can direct itself toward objects internal (images, memories, etc.) and external (things, relations, and events in the world). Phenomenologists argue that in tentionality is a central feature of consciousness. This article discusses phenomenological approaches to intentionality. It consider intentionality’s mental, motor, and Effective di Pensions as developed within the phenomenological tradition. It also considers why phe nomenologists think intentionality is integral to subjectivity, and how this qualitative ori entation can help illuminate the lived experience of psychopathological conditions, some of which appear to involve subtle disturbances of intentionality.

Keywords: intentionality, embodiment, affectivity, phenomenology, psychopathology, schizophrenia, Brentano, Husserl, Merleau-Monty, Sartre # Introduction RIGHT now, you’re probably conscious of many things: for example, the words on the page—or rather the meaning of the words on the page as your eyes skim across them. But you’re probably conscious of other things, too: the slight twinge in your back from sitting too long, the faint aroma of coffee in the mug on your desk, or the nagging feeling that you’ve forgotten to do something. These different things are objects of your conscious Bess.

This feature of consciousness—its ability to be about things—is what philosophers call “intentionality.” The term comes from the Latin verb Nintendo, which means to aim, hold out, or stretch. In this technical sense, intentionality refers to the way consciousness can stretch out or be directed toward objects internal (images, memories, etc.) and external Intentionality (things, relations, and events in the world). Conscious mental states are never empty but always of or about something.

Phenomenologists argue that intentionality is a central feature of consciousness. Edmund Husserl, the founder of phenomenology, appropriated the notion from his teacher Franz Brentano, who rejuvenated discussions of intentionality found in medieval philosophers like Thomas Aquinas, John Duns Scouts, and William of Ockham. And these thinkers ap propriated discussions going back to Greek philosophers like Aristotle and Empedocles. We also find sophisticated discussions of intentionality in non-Western traditions—for ex ample, sixthand seventh-century Indian Buddhist thinkers like Signāga and Dharmaīrti.

I focus here on phenomenological approaches to intentionality since they’re particularly relevant to psychopathology. Not only have phenomenologists spent more time consider ing intentionality than other philosophical traditions. They’ve also broadened discussions to consider intentionality’s embodied and Effective dimensions—themes helpful for under standing the character of some psychopathological conditions. Phenomenologists are con corned not simply with the formal or logical properties of intentionality but rather with how intentionality is integral to subjectivity. This qualitative orientation can help illuminate the lived experience of psychopathological conditions, some of which appear to involve subtle disturbances of intentionality.

(p. 326) Brentano on Intentionality Phenomenologists take their characterization of intentionality from Brentano, who looked to construct a “descriptive psychology” (or what he sometimes calls “phenomenology”): a descriptive analysis of experience from the inside. Brentano insists that intentionality must be at the center of this project. Intentionality, he tells us, “is charac teristic exclusively of mental phenomena. No physical phenomenon exhibits anything like it. We can, therefore, define mental phenomena by saying that they are those phenomena which contain an object intentionally within themselves” ( Brentano 1995b: 68). For Brentano, intentionality not only distinguishes mental from physical phenomena. It also gives individual mental states their distinctive character: “Every mental phenomenon in Eludes something as an object within itself, although they do not all do so in the same way. In presentation something is presented, in judgment something is affirmed or de Died, in love loved, in hate hated, in desire desired, and so on” ( Brentano 1995b: 68).

Several points are important. First, Brentano argues that each type of conscious act is constituted as the kind of act it is only via its relation to its intentional object. An act of perception is only such in relation a perceptual object; likewise, other conscious mental states like beliefs, desires, memories, and emotions. Accordingly, to understand the onto ogy of consciousness, we must investigate the different relations that connect conscious acts with their respective intentional objects. As later phenomenologists will insist, this feature of intentionality illustrates that consciousness is a relational phenomenon. We are Intentionality “through and through compounded of relationships with the world” ( Merleau-Monty 2002: xiv).

Second, looking at how conscious acts relate to their intentional objects allows us to Hindi viduate different acts. The same intentional object—a bottle of Belgian beer, say—can be the intentional object of multiple conscious acts. I can believe the beer is in my refrigera tor, desire the beer, and upon opening my refrigerator, visually perceive the beer. In each case, the bottle of beer stands in a distinct relation to the act within which it is present as intentional object. And this is significant, phenomenologists insist, because these differ ent relations enable us to distinguish the character and structure of different conscious acts within the inventory of all possible mental activity. Intentionality is the tool that en bales these taxonomic considerations.

Finally, this way of thinking about intentionality is different from other ways of character zing mind–world relations as primarily involving causality. Intentional relations need not be causal relations; minds can intend non-existent objects like unicorns and Sherlock Holmes—or existent objects beyond our perceptual reach (e.g. distant planets), or even objects that once existed but no longer do (e.g. my deceased grandmother). To be clear, the intentional relation itself is, in these cases, very real. I can feel strongly about a fic tonal literary character, say, or be moved by the memory of my beloved dead grandmoth er. But neither the literary character nor my beloved grandmother exist as objects in the world. The form of my conscious relation to them will, accordingly, be different than mind–world relations characterized exclusively by appealing to causal descriptions involve ing existent entities. This is particularly useful in the context of phenomenological psy chopathology, which may involve investigating how individuals experientially relate to non-existent individuals, objects, and events.

(p. 327) Beyond Brentano: Mental, Bodily, and Af # fictive Dimensions of Intentionality Although nearly all major phenomenologists quibble with different parts of Brentano’s analysis—especially his idea that intentional objects are “in” consciousness as mental in termediaries between mind and world—they nevertheless agree that investigations of consciousness must begin with intentionality. But phenomenologists also move beyond Brentano in a number of important ways.

To see how this is so, we can note first that phenomenologists insist that minds are ire ducibly embodied (Gallagher and Zahavi 2008: chapter 7). The things we think and exp rience—and the way we think and experience them—reflect aspects of the physical strum Cure of our body as well as the things our body can do. So, intentionality for phenomenal ogists is rooted in our bodies and agency. This motor dimension has to be part of a full picture of intentionality.

Intentionality

Additionally, phenomenologists argue that we don’t just think thoughts or perceive things. We feel feelings. And these feelings—Effective phenomena like emotions, moods, and bod ily states—play an important role in shaping how the world and other people show up for us, experientially. Feelings are an essential part of the way we are in tentionally open and responsive to our world.

Phenomenologists thus move beyond Brentano by developing a multidimensional ap roach to intentionality that respects not only its mental character but also its embodied and Effective dimensions. Next, I will consider these three dimensions of intentionality— 1 mental intentionality, motor intentionality, and Effective intentionality —in turn. To be clear: from a phenomenological perspective, these dimensions are interrelated. Intention laity is an integrative achievement not of minds, brains, or bodies but of persons —sub Sects open and responsive to physical and social environments. So, while we can make a conceptual distinction between these different dimensions to clarify intentionality’s over all structure—as well as differentiate various ways intentionality that becomes disturbed in psychopathology—we should remain mindful that these dimensions are interwoven within the practice of intentionality conceived of as an embodied and situated activity of the whole person.

Mental Intentionality For Husserl, the structure of intentionality can be analyzed into two components: the ob Sect as intended by consciousness ( noema ), and the conscious act that intends the object (noesis ). In other words, noema picks out the object-side of the intentional relation (i.e. what is given to consciousness) whereas noesis picks out the subject-side (i.e. how the “what” is given to consciousness). For example, if I remember the front door of my grandmother’s house, the (p. 328) noema is the door-as-remembered; it is what is made present to consciousness. The noesis is the act of remembering; it is how the door is made present to consciousness. However, if I visit my grandmother’s home, the intentional ob Sect will remain the same—her front door—but now the Poetic structure through which I intend the front door will be different. It will now be a perceptual act—and the noesis– noema structure of that act will vary accordingly. Husserl argues that all conscious acts have this Poetic structure. It is the basic framework for our intentional engagement with 2 the world.

In addition to its Poetic structure, Husserl describes another important feature of mental intentionality. He says intentionality “wants to go to the object itself... that is, to an inch ition that gives the object itself, to an intuition that is in itself the consciousness of having the object itself” ( Husserl 2001: 126). He continues: “This directedness is... a striving, it is from the very beginning ‘driving at’ a satisfaction” ( Husserl 2001: 126). There are sev real points here worthy of consideration.

Perhaps most important is that, for Husserl, intentionality is not a passive state in which the external world presses itself onto a yielding observer but instead a dynamic, tempo rally extended activity (i.e. a kind of “striving” or “driving at satisfaction”). This claim Intentionality aligns Husserl with contemporary Inactive approaches to perception stressing the inter dependence of perception and action (e.g. Bower and Gallagher 2013; Hurley 1998; Noë 2004; Thompson 2005).

Consider seeing a red ball. When we see the ball, we don’t actually see the whole thing. We only see the part or “aspect” facing us. Nevertheless, Husserl insists we experience the ball as a complete three-dimensional object with density, spatial extension, and un seen parts potentially capable of being seen. These unseen parts are part of the content of our experience, co-given alongside the visible parts: “Of necessity a physical thing can be given only ‘one-sidedly’... A physical thing is necessarily given in mere ‘modes of ap pearance’ in which necessarily a core of ‘what is actually presented’ is apprehended as being surrounded by a horizon of ‘co-givenness,’ which is not givenness proper, and of more or less vague indeterminateness ” (Husserl 1998: 94).

For Husserl, this feature of our experience can be understood by looking at the intention al structure of perception’s “striving” character. The reason unseen parts of the ball are co-given is because we experience the ball as offering possibilities for engagement—what James Gibson terms “affordances” —that provide increasingly determinate specifications of the ball’s nature. Put otherwise, the ball affords various interactions (touching, handling, picking up, throwing, etc.) specified both by our possession of ki aesthetic capacities (e.g. the ability to turn our torso, tilt our head, reach for the ball and grasp it) as well as our implicit practical knowledge of how exercising these ca pasties will reliably alter our experience by bringing hidden sides into view. These afford dances are part of the noematic content of perception.

Additionally, since intentionality is embodied and situated, Husserl argues that this stria ing isn’t just going on in our head. It’s a relational process through which we stretch out side of ourselves and interact with the world. And the objects partially constitutive of these relations present qualities—again, given as noematic content—affording different kinds of (p. 329) interaction; they establish an object’s meaning. Taking seriously the stria ing character of intentionality thus illuminates how perception involves a “constitutive duet” between subject and object ( Husserl 2001: 52).

Motor Intentionality As we’ve seen, Husserl is sensitive to the role embodiment plays in shaping the character and content of intentionality. But Merleau-Monty takes this idea further. He argues that we are fundamentally animate bodies open and responsive to a meaningful environment; this bodily openness is constitutive of our being-in-the-world. And this openness means that our embodied being is intentional all the way down —including prenoetic levels of worldly engagement. For Merleau-Monty, this is a “deeper” intentionality “beneath the intentionality of representation” (2002: 140 n. 54).

Intentionality

Merleau-Monty observes that, within the ebb and flow of everyday life, we routinely act— in an organized and purposive way—without conscious reflection, planning, or even full awareness. “Motor intentionality” refers to the integrated suite of skills, capacities, and habits—not all of which are available to consciousness—that enable this unreflective ac son. It picks out a way of being directed toward the world different than we find within the Poetic structure of mental intentionality.

Consider reaching for a coffee mug while reading the newspaper. We don’t first locate the mug—along with different parts of our body—and then think about various movements and postural adjustments needed to carry out our reach. Instead, we simply reach for the mug spontaneously—and crucially, our grasp calibrates itself accordingly. Body and world together organize a coherent and meaningful experience. As Merleau-Monty puts it, “From the outset the grasping movement is magically at its completion; it can begin only by anticipating its end” (2002: 119).

Once again, this dimension of intentionality is rooted in our embodiment. This is because we don’t merely inhabit our bodies as objects, as physical things with properties similar to other objects in the world. We also live through our bodies onto the world; we expert Once them from the inside, as subjects. Accordingly, we can unthinkingly grasp the mug because have an immediate proprioceptive and kinaesthetic sense of where our limbs are in space and what sort of skinful actions are possible within that space. This is a tacit pre-reflective bodily awareness operative without deliberate reflex son. Moreover—and to return to an earlier point—we immediately per cave the mug as meaningful: as an artifact affording a range of different interactions de termined by the structure of the cup, the context in which we encounter it, and our preeflective awareness of our body as an intentional vehicle.

For Merleau-Monty, motor intentionality is pervasive throughout everyday life: changing gears while driving, brushing our teeth, tying our shoes, typing on our laptop, stroking our child’s cheek while singing a lullaby, playing tennis, practicing guitar scales, lunging for the bottle of wine about to fall off the table, and many other contexts of spontaneous action. In these cases, there is a particular form of bodily understanding of objects and environments—as well as our situatedness within these environments—that allows us to be immediately open and responsive to the things happening around us. For Merleau-Pon ty, “[t]These (p. 330) elucidations enable us clearly to understand motility as basic intel tonality. Consciousness is in the first place not a matter of ‘I think that’ but of ‘I can’ ” (2002: 159).

Effective Intentionality For phenomenologists, Effective states are not internal states hidden away inside brains and bodies. They are embodied and Inactive processes that connect us to a shared world and guide our dealings with it (Colombetti and Kruger 2015; Kruger 2014; Kruger and Intentionality Szanto 2016). Importantly, they also have a revelatory character that shapes how the 3 world shows up for us in our experience.

Heidegger, for example, argues that moods earn’t simply add-ons providing color to other mental phenomena. Moods are examples of Effective phenomena that disclose the world as being a certain way. A mood, he says, “has always already disclosed, in every case, Be ing-in-the-world as a whole, and makes it possible first of all to direct oneself toward something” ( Heidegger 1962: 176). For Heidegger, moods set up our encounter with the world by constituting our sense of belonging to it. They reveal the world as a space of practical purposes, values, goals, and activities—a space of meaning —and in this sense they are primordial phenomena presupposed by the intelligibility of our thoughts, expert Fences, and actions (Radcliffe 2008: 48).

Sartre offers a vivid example of the revelatory character of affectivity. After reading a text late into the night, we find it increasingly difficult to focus on the words or their meaning. For Sartre, our eyestrain is first “indicated by objects of the world; that is, by the book which I read. It is with more difficulty that the words are detached from the undifferenti ted ground which they constitute; they may tremble, quiver; their meaning can be de rived only with effort...” (1989: 332). In this case, as focusing on the words becomes more difficult, we shift our attention from the words (experienced as blurry, unstable, or lacking meaning) to the Effective quality of the pain around our eyes and temples. For Sartre, this case highlights the Janus-faced intentional structure of affectivity: Effective states convey information about self and non-self.

This revelatory role of affectivity is supported by different streams of empirical work. Sev real studies indicate that subjects estimate the grade of an incline to be steeper when wearing a heavy backpack as opposed to not wearing one, or when they feel fatigued as opposed to refreshed. Even the presence of a sup Sportive friend—actually present or merely imagined—leads subjects to perceive the in line as less steep than when alone. The Effective support we receive from others shapes how we perceive the world and its affordances. A similar dynamic ap pears to be at work in the social world. There is evidence, for example, that shared affect is a crucial component of empathy. It allows individuals to pick up on the ways others are responsive to environmental affordances, and in so doing, to share and understand their perspective on the world.

(p. 331) Without this orienting function of shared affect, however—such as in autistic spec rum disorder (autism spectrum disorder)—individuals struggle to get grip on what others find important in a given situation and have difficulty relating to them. This absence of “Effective framing” is one of the reasons people with autism spectrum disorder struggle to comfortably in habit the common space of the social world.

Intentionality

Disruptions of Intentionality Phenomenologically informed psychopathologists argue that the generative disorder of schizophrenia is a disturbance of the first-person perspective. According to this socalled ipseity-disturbance model (IDM), this disturbance can include a diminished sense of existing as a bodily subject, a weakened sense of ownership of one’s thoughts and ex perience, a gradual fragmentation or loss of coherence of the field of awareness, and dis Curbed self–world, self–other boundaries.

These phenomenological descriptions can be enriched by highlighting how various forms of intentional disruptions co-occur with or exacerbate disruptions of ipseity. For example, Fuchs draws on Husserl’s analysis of “inner time-consciousness” to relate schizophrenic disorders to the temporal structure of consciousness. For Husserl, the tem oral microstructure of consciousness—as intentional—consists of a dynamic self-organic ing process comprised of both a retention of what I have just seen, heard, or thought, as well as an anticipatory protection of what I expect to continue seeing, hearing, or think ing. This temporal synthesis is a tacit background process organizing our experiences in to sequences of coherent units.

In schizophrenia, this temporal microstructure of intentional consciousness can become fragmented (Fuchs 2007: 233). Consequently, patients’ capacity to make sense of situ sons, experiences, and the behavior of others is impaired. In the early stages of psy chosis, for instance, experiences such as the loss of one’s train of thought, difficulty fol lowing conversations, or difficulty maintaining narrative coherence are common. One patient reports: “I’m a good listener but often I’m not really taking it in. I nod my head and smile but it’s just a lot of jumbled up words to me” ( McGhie and Chapman 1961: 106).

This temporal disruption also destabilizes the dynamics of motor intentionality. One pa taint says: I found recently that I was thinking of myself doing things before I would do them.

If I am going to sit down, for example, I have got to think of myself and almost see myself sitting down before I do it. It’s the same with other things like washing, eating, and even dressing...

(McGhie and Chapman 1961: 107)

In these cases, patients take up normally spontaneous, unreflective actions in a deliver ate and thoughtful way; each movement is considered in isolation from the others, lead ing to a “disautomation” compromising their ability to negotiate physical and social nevi ronments (Fuchs 2007: 233). Maiese highlights how this disautomation also involves a disruption of (p. 332) Effective intentionality—a disturbance of what she terms “Effective framing”—in that “the body is no longer ‘feelingly’ integrated into its lived environment” ( Maiese 2015: 180). This loss of bodily-Effective responsivity results in a di Intentionality Finished sense of ownership, agency, and control. Disturbances of motor and Effective in tentionality also characterize some of the disruptions of embodiment, spatial cognition, and perception of social and environmental affordances characteristic of conditions like depression and Moebius Syndrome. In sum, focusing on disruptions of intentionality—along with ap roaches like IDM—can in this way deepen and enrich our understanding of core disturb Dances involved in different psychopathologies.

Kruger J. and Henriksen M. G.. “Embodiment and Affectivity in Moebius Syn dome and Schizophrenia: A Phenomenological Analysis.” In J. E. Hackett and J. A. Sim Cons (eating disorders.), Phenomenology for the 21st Century, pp. 249–267. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kruger J. and Szanto T.. “Extended Emotions.” Philosophy Compass 11: 863–878.

Kruger J. and Taylor-Aiken A.. “Losing Social Space: Phenomenological Disrupt sons of Spatiality and Embodiment in Moebius Syndrome and Schizophrenia.” In J. Reynolds and R. Sebold (eating disorders.), Phenomenology and Science, pp. 121–139. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Intentionality Legrand D.. “Pre-reflective Self-as-Subject from Experiential and Empirical Per spectives.” Consciousness and Cognition 16: 583–599. Maiese M.. Embodied Selves and Divided Minds. New York: Oxford University Press. McGhie A. and Chapman J.. “Disorders of Attention and Perception in Early Schizo phrenia.” British Journal of Medical Psychology 34: 103–116. Merleau-Monty M.. Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith. New York: Rout ledge. Noë A.. Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Paras J., Holler P., Kirchner T., Thalbitzer J., Jansson L., Hardest P., and Zahavi D.. “EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-experience.” Psychopathology 38: 236–258. Proffitt D. R., Bhalla M., Gossweiler R., and Midget J.. “Perceiving Geographical Slant.” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 2: 409–428. Proffitt D. R., Creme S. H., and Bosh W. D.. “Seeing mountains in Mole Hills: Geo graphical-slant Perception.” Psychological Science 12: 418–423. Radcliffe M.. Feelings of Being: Phenomenology, Psychiatry and the Sense of Real ty, 1st edn. New York: Oxford University Press. Rietveld E.. “Situated Normativity: The Normative Aspect of Embodied Cognition in Unreflective Action.” Mind 117: 973–1001. Sartre J.-P.. Being and Nothingness, trans. H. E. Barnes. London: Rutledge. Sass L. A. and Paras, J.. “Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self.” Schizo phrenia Bulletin 29: 427–444. Schnall S., Barber K. D., Stefanucci J. K., and Proffitt D. R.. “Social Support and the Perception of Geographical Slant.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44: 1246–1255. Searle J. R.. Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cam bridge University Press. Slay J. and Stephan, A.. “Effective Intentionality and Self-consciousness.” Con sciousness and Cognition 17: 506–513.

(p. 334) Slay J., Paskaleva A., and Stephan A.. “Inactive Emotion and Impaired Agency in Depression.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 20: 33–55. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R.. Emotions and Personhood: Exploring Fragility, Mak ing Sense of Vulnerability. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Intentionality Legrand D.. “Pre-reflective Self-as-Subject from Experiential and Empirical Per spectives.” Consciousness and Cognition 16: 583–599. Maiese M.. Embodied Selves and Divided Minds. New York: Oxford University Press. McGhie A. and Chapman J.. “Disorders of Attention and Perception in Early Schizo phrenia.” British Journal of Medical Psychology 34: 103–116. Merleau-Monty M.. Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith. New York: Rout ledge. Noë A.. Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Paras J., Holler P., Kirchner T., Thalbitzer J., Jansson L., Hardest P., and Zahavi D.. “EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-experience.” Psychopathology 38: 236–258. Proffitt D. R., Bhalla M., Gossweiler R., and Midget J.. “Perceiving Geographical Slant.” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 2: 409–428. Proffitt D. R., Creme S. H., and Bosh W. D.. “Seeing mountains in Mole Hills: Geo graphical-slant Perception.” Psychological Science 12: 418–423. Radcliffe M.. Feelings of Being: Phenomenology, Psychiatry and the Sense of Real ty, 1st edn. New York: Oxford University Press. Rietveld E.. “Situated Normativity: The Normative Aspect of Embodied Cognition in Unreflective Action.” Mind 117: 973–1001. Sartre J.-P.. Being and Nothingness, trans. H. E. Barnes. London: Rutledge. Sass L. A. and Paras, J.. “Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self.” Schizo phrenia Bulletin 29: 427–444. Schnall S., Barber K. D., Stefanucci J. K., and Proffitt D. R.. “Social Support and the Perception of Geographical Slant.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44: 1246–1255. Searle J. R.. Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cam bridge University Press. Slay J. and Stephan, A.. “Effective Intentionality and Self-consciousness.” Con sciousness and Cognition 17: 506–513.

(p. 334) Slay J., Paskaleva A., and Stephan A.. “Inactive Emotion and Impaired Agency in Depression.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 20: 33–55. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R.. Emotions and Personhood: Exploring Fragility, Mak ing Sense of Vulnerability. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Intentionality

Thompson E.. “Sensorimotor Subjectivity and the Inactive Approach to Expert Once.” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 4: 407–427.

Notes:

1 ( ) Phenomenologists like Husserl and Merleau-Monty speak of act vs. operative intentionality to mark a difference between thinking of intentionality as a feature of con scions acts vs. embodied actions. For simplicity, I adopt more straightforward terminolo gy.

2 ( ) How we ought to understand the ontological status of the noema continues to be a matter of debate in the literature. See Gallagher 2012: 69–71.

3 ( ) For a detailed look at the role of emotions in mental illness, see Stanghellini and Ros fort 2013.

Joel Kruger Joel Kruger Department of Sociology, Philosophy, and Anthropology, University of Exeter, UK Personhood Personhood René Rosfort The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Personhood plays a fundamental, but obscure role in contemporary mental health care. The notion is of vital importance to phenomenological psychopathology because it articu Bates the interplay of autonomy and heteronomy, self and otherness, at work in mental suffering. The complexity of personhood is connected with the circumstance that to be a person is both a fact and a norm. To see every human being (ourselves as well as the oth er) as a person is a normative task that is rooted in the fact that a human being is an Hindi visual being who experiences herself as a unique and irreplaceable person. This expert Once of being a person is more than a sense of selfhood. It involves an otherness (e.g. body, world, other people) that is constitutive of our personal identity. Narrative expo rations of the fragility of personal identity can help us to make sense of mental suffering.

Keywords: norm, fact, autonomy, selfhood, otherness, identity, narrative, mental suffering # Introduction THE notion of personhood plays a fundamental, but challenging role in contemporary mental health care. One of the principal reasons for the complicated status of personhood is that it functions as both a descriptive and normative notion. What it means to under stand and treat the patient as a person has been an open question in psychiatry, at least since the humanitarian reforms pioneered by, among others, Philippe Panel and Vincenzo Chiarugi around the turn of the nineteenth century (Seiner 2008; Scull 2015: 202–223). The notion of personhood has a long history, drawing upon both philosophy and theology (Strawson 1959; Sturma 1997: 44–57; Taylor 1989: 127–142), but the modern understand ing of being a person is a child of the Enlightenment’s—and in particular Emmanuel Kant’s—call for autonomy and responsibility that in mental health care brought about a new way of seeing the patient. The patient is no longer to be understood merely as a pas chive object of her or his illness, but as an autonomous person whose thoughts, actions, and self-understanding are a constitutive part of the illness itself. This recognition of the patient as an autonomous person was the first major step toward the consolidation of psy Personhood chopathology as an indispensable aspect of psychiatry. To understand mental suffering we need to understand how the person experiences, thinks about, and deals with her or his suffering. The notion of personhood is challenging, however, due to the fact that person hood is an idea that we need to acknowledge in order to see it. Personhood is a normative notion, meaning that the act of recognition—that is, the norm that we should acknowl edge a human being as a person—is a prerequisite for actually seeing a person ( Kant 1996a: 79–81). Personhood is not a feature of a human being that we can describe, mea sure, or examine on a par with, for example, a kidney or the amygdala. As philosopher Robert Spaemann argues: “There is no characteristic that can be called ‘being a person’. Rather, we say that certain beings are persons due to specific characteristics that we have already identified” ( Spaemann 1996: 14; author’s trans.). In other words, to under stand a human being—oneself as well as another—as a person is a way of seeing. We have to want to see a human being as more than just a lump of meat. This means that seeing every human being as a person is a choice or—as some would argue—an ethical demand.

(p. 336) The notion of personhood has not been a central notion in the phenomenological tradition as, for example, the notions of subjectivity, intentionality, or life-world. One rea son for this is the interplay of descriptive and normative features at work in the notion. On the one hand, personhood engages with the individual psychological make-up of the subject that goes counter to phenomenology’s transcendental ambition to arrive at an im personal account of subjective experience (e.g. Husserl 2001: 40–55; Gallagher and Za have 2012: 19–21). Understanding what it means to be a person entails an insistence on the individual character of experience. One human being cannot experience the expert Once of another human being. While the biological functions and the subjective structures of experience can be investigated from an impersonal thirdor first-person perspective, the texture or flesh of an actual human experience is uniquely personal. This is to say that to make sense of a particular person’s experience, we need to take into account the inn merable—and more or less articulate—aspects that make up a particular personality, that is, physical appearance, nationality, language, upbringing, education, tastes, dislikes, con Ferns, ambitions, ideals, dreams, and so on. This inordinate descriptive particularity is part of what makes personal experience phenomenologically suspect. Another thing that makes the notion of person sit uneasily with the phenomenological tradition is the fore mentioned normative character of the notion. Most phenomenologists understand their work as primarily, or exclusively, concerned with a descriptive clarification of subjectivity, experience, and selfhood. As we have seen, we cannot describe a person without first ac knowledging the norm of personhood. This means that the notion of personhood cannot be logically or descriptively distilled from our examinations of human biology or human experience. It is a normative perspective on what it means to be human. And as such it is something that we choose to adopt in our approach to human beings, and this choice en tails several questions: Why should we consider human beings as persons? What, if any thing, distinguishes a person from a thing or a non-human animal? And, perhaps most im portantly, beside the historical fact that in psychiatry it has become an ethical obligation to treat patients as persons is there any psychopathological advantage to be gained from chopathology as an indispensable aspect of psychiatry. To understand mental suffering we need to understand how the person experiences, thinks about, and deals with her or his suffering. The notion of personhood is challenging, however, due to the fact that person hood is an idea that we need to acknowledge in order to see it. Personhood is a normative notion, meaning that the act of recognition—that is, the norm that we should acknowl edge a human being as a person—is a prerequisite for actually seeing a person ( Kant 1996a: 79–81). Personhood is not a feature of a human being that we can describe, mea sure, or examine on a par with, for example, a kidney or the amygdala. As philosopher Robert Spaemann argues: “There is no characteristic that can be called ‘being a person’. Rather, we say that certain beings are persons due to specific characteristics that we have already identified” ( Spaemann 1996: 14; author’s trans.). In other words, to under stand a human being—oneself as well as another—as a person is a way of seeing. We have to want to see a human being as more than just a lump of meat. This means that seeing every human being as a person is a choice or—as some would argue—an ethical demand.

(p. 336) The notion of personhood has not been a central notion in the phenomenological tradition as, for example, the notions of subjectivity, intentionality, or life-world. One rea son for this is the interplay of descriptive and normative features at work in the notion. On the one hand, personhood engages with the individual psychological make-up of the subject that goes counter to phenomenology’s transcendental ambition to arrive at an im personal account of subjective experience (e.g. Husserl 2001: 40–55; Gallagher and Za have 2012: 19–21). Understanding what it means to be a person entails an insistence on the individual character of experience. One human being cannot experience the expert Once of another human being. While the biological functions and the subjective structures of experience can be investigated from an impersonal thirdor first-person perspective, the texture or flesh of an actual human experience is uniquely personal. This is to say that to make sense of a particular person’s experience, we need to take into account the inn merable—and more or less articulate—aspects that make up a particular personality, that is, physical appearance, nationality, language, upbringing, education, tastes, dislikes, con Ferns, ambitions, ideals, dreams, and so on. This inordinate descriptive particularity is part of what makes personal experience phenomenologically suspect. Another thing that makes the notion of person sit uneasily with the phenomenological tradition is the fore mentioned normative character of the notion. Most phenomenologists understand their work as primarily, or exclusively, concerned with a descriptive clarification of subjectivity, experience, and selfhood. As we have seen, we cannot describe a person without first ac knowledging the norm of personhood. This means that the notion of personhood cannot be logically or descriptively distilled from our examinations of human biology or human experience. It is a normative perspective on what it means to be human. And as such it is something that we choose to adopt in our approach to human beings, and this choice en tails several questions: Why should we consider human beings as persons? What, if any thing, distinguishes a person from a thing or a non-human animal? And, perhaps most im portantly, beside the historical fact that in psychiatry it has become an ethical obligation to treat patients as persons is there any psychopathological advantage to be gained from Personhood examining human beings as persons in addition to, say, biological organisms or experience ing selves?

In what follows, I will address these questions by looking at the interplay of descriptive and normative aspects of personhood, arguing that the notion is of vital importance to phenomenological psychopathology. In fact, despite the modest life of the notion in the phenomenological tradition, several major phenomenologists, both in philosophy and psy chopathology, have contributed with careful investigations of what it means to be a per son. Here I will primarily draw upon the work by the French philosopher Paul Ricoeur who, arguably, has worked out the most detailed phenomenological account of person hood.

Subjectivity, Self, and Person Human experience is subjective in the sense that a human being’s experience of the world involves an experience of experiencing the world. We are self-aware of our expert Once, though most of the time this self-awareness plays a tacit role in the background of everyday experience. But when something disturbs our experience of the world—for ex ample, when we make mistakes, when facing mental or physical difficulties, when we find ourselves at (p. 337) the center of attention, or in philosophical moments—we become aware that our experience is our experience. We are not merely experiencing something. We are involved in our experience and that experience matters to us. Phenomenology of Hers methodological tools to explore the basic structures of our experience and to engage with the relation between self-awareness and experience. This exploration provides us with both a clarification of the various aspects of subjectivity and an account of selfhood. While the former is primarily concerned with investigating the experiential features of self-awareness such as intentionality, temporality, spatiality, embodiment, intersubjectivi ty, the latter, examines our sense of being self that is, what it means to be a self that is aware of itself in experiencing the world, other people, and itself. These two aspects of the phenomenological exploration of experience are obviously interconnected, but exactly how the two aspects are connected remains an open question. Most contemporary phe nomenologists argue that subjectivity involves some sense of selfhood, but there is signify cant disagreement over whether selfhood can be reduced to a minimal pre-reflective sense of agency and ownership or re quires a more reflective sense of identity (Grøn 2004; Fugal and Spinet 2012; Tengelyi 2012).

This disagreement stems from the tectonic shift in the foundation of the phenomenology cal landscape sat in motion in the late 1920s by Heidegger’s critique of Husserl’s ran scendental conception of subjectivity, and by Heidegger’s subsequent hermeneutical ap roach to the question of being a self. While Husserl’s phenomenology is preoccupied with a meticulously detailed examination of the pre-reflective, transcendental structures of experience, subjectivity, and self-awareness, Heidegger’s phenomenological work en ages with a so-called hermeneutics of facticity that while still having transcendental am Personhood bitions is primarily concerned with making sense of the feelings, cares, and concerns of the self. One of the main differences between the two phenom nological projects concerns the notion of selfhood. Husserl’s notion of selfhood is a thin one derived from his scientifically careful descriptive analysis of the experiential strum Cures of subjectivity and remains a minimal, pre-reflective sense of agency and ownership working in the background of experience. Heidegger’s notion of selfhood, on the other hand, goes way beyond the descriptive analysis of the experiential features of subjectivity. It is a thick notion informed by his existential interpretation of anxiety, boredom, fear, care, and depicts a self-struggling with the challenges of human identity.

Heidegger soon lost interest in questions of subjectivity and selfhood and turned his at Mention to being in general, but his hermeneutical phenomenology found fertile soil among the first generation of French phenomenologists. In this generation Emmanuel Levinas and Paul Ricoeur are the ones who spent most time and intellectual energy on trying to make sense of what it means to be a person. Both authors use Heidegger’s onto logical explorations of selfhood as the template of their own work, but they do so in signify Scantly different ways. Levinas criticizes Heidegger (and most of thinkers in the Western philosophical tradition) for privileging ontology over ethics being more interested in so phisticated speculations about the nature of the world than trying to make sense of our responsibility to the human being standing in front of us. Levinas sees it as his task to re vert this understanding of philosophy arguing that ethics should the primary aim of our reflective efforts. His lifework is therefore dedicated to a meticulous and careful examine son of the explicit ethical demand involved in our meeting with the other human being. While Levinas throughout his career remains skeptical of the onto logical implications in the notion of (p. 338) personhood and therefore avoids dealing sys thematically with the notion, the interplay of ethical and ontological as Sects of personhood is a key issue in Ricoeur’s philosophy. In fact, Ricoeur criticizes Lev ins for producing an asymmetrical account of selfhood that dismisses the ontological as Sects of being a self for sake of the ethical concern for our responsibility to the other ( Ri coeur 1992: 335–341). Ricoeur’s argument is that, however, we cannot hope to under stand ethics without ontology—and vice versa. That is to say, that we cannot come to un derstand how to behave if we do not examine what it is to be human, and we cannot un derstand what it is to be human without understanding our responsibility to the other person. And the core of Ricoeur’s argument is exactly that the notion of personhood helps us to brings out and examine this this interplay of ethics and ontology, that is, the Korma Dive and descriptive factors that make human beings human.

Heidegger soon lost interest in questions of subjectivity and selfhood and turned his at Mention to being in general, but his hermeneutical phenomenology found fertile soil among the first generation of French phenomenologists. In this generation Emmanuel Levinas and Paul Ricoeur are the ones who spent most time and intellectual energy on trying to make sense of what it means to be a person. Both authors use Heidegger’s onto logical explorations of selfhood as the template of their own work, but they do so in signify Scantly different ways. Levinas criticizes Heidegger (and most of thinkers in the Western philosophical tradition) for privileging ontology over ethics being more interested in so phisticated speculations about the nature of the world than trying to make sense of our responsibility to the human being standing in front of us. Levinas sees it as his task to re vert this understanding of philosophy arguing that ethics should the primary aim of our reflective efforts. His lifework is therefore dedicated to a meticulous and careful examine son of the explicit ethical demand involved in our meeting with the other human being. While Levinas throughout his career remains skeptical of the onto logical implications in the notion of (p. 338) personhood and therefore avoids dealing sys thematically with the notion, the interplay of ethical and ontological as Sects of personhood is a key issue in Ricoeur’s philosophy. In fact, Ricoeur criticizes Lev ins for producing an asymmetrical account of selfhood that dismisses the ontological as Sects of being a self for sake of the ethical concern for our responsibility to the other ( Ri coeur 1992: 335–341). Ricoeur’s argument is that, however, we cannot hope to under stand ethics without ontology—and vice versa. That is to say, that we cannot come to un derstand how to behave if we do not examine what it is to be human, and we cannot un derstand what it is to be human without understanding our responsibility to the other person. And the core of Ricoeur’s argument is exactly that the notion of personhood helps us to brings out and examine this this interplay of ethics and ontology, that is, the Korma Dive and descriptive factors that make human beings human.

For more than half a century, Ricoeur patiently developed Heidegger’s phenomenological hermeneutics of selfhood into a complex account of personhood. This account is ground ed in what Ricoeur takes to be a basic experiential tension in human self-awareness be tween selfhood and otherness, involving, the tension between the voluntary and the invol unary, the active and the receptive, the autonomous and the heteronomous aspects of subjectivity. Ricoeur uses this tension to develop Heidegger’s existential analysis of human feelings and care into a full-fledged hermeneutical phenomenology of the biological, cultural, and ethical factors involved in being a person. Personhood, for Ri Personhood coeur, is a necessary notion in our exploration of what it means to be human, since the notion of selfhood is not sufficient to make sense of the peculiar fragility of human identi ty. The notion of personhood allows us to explore the tension between selfhood and other Bess, that is, the innumerable ways that our experience of being a self is troubled by an otherness that challenges our understanding of what and who we are. The notion is thus more comprehensive than the notion of selfhood in that it investigates the ways otherness disturbs and challenges our experience of identity. Personhood, in other words, helps us to make sense of the fact that we are biological organisms whose identity cannot be re Educed to a biological constancy, but is dependent upon how we experience and think about ourselves, and upon how other people see us. As Ricoeur argues, the fragility of hu man identity is rooted in the various ways in which our biology challenges our experience of being an autonomous self: It is always the moment of nature, the otherness of life, that, in the proper sense of the word, fosters and nourishes the oppositions of each consciousness to the other than itself... And the very term “self”— Selbst —proclaims that self-identity continues to be carried by this self-difference by this ever-recurring otherness re siding in life. It is life that becomes the other, in and through which the self cease lessly achieves itself.

(Ricoeur 1970: 472)

This insistence on the biological roots of the fragility of human identity marks a signify cant break with the phenomenological approach of Husserl and Heidegger, both of whom were dismissive of a biological intrusion into phenomenology. For Ricoeur, however, to make sense of what it means to be a person phenom nology cannot but take into account the biological aspects of human identity (e.g. height, skin color, metabolism, kidney function). In fact, the biological character of our identity is one of the major sources of otherness that a person needs to deal with throughout her life. Our body constantly challenges our experience of ourselves. We can never fully un derstand or appropriate (p. 339) our own body, and part of what it means to be a person is to acknowledge that the biological otherness of our embodiment is an integral part of our identity (Ricoeur 1966: 409–443). The fact that our experience of who we are is disturbed by that which we cannot understand or appropriate means that human identity is intrinsic ally fragile. Our self-understanding cannot but be at odds with what we are. This means that even though we in a sense are what we are with all our concrete particularities, in another sense we are not what (we think) we are (Ricoeur 1992: 317–319). To exist as a person over and through time is to experience oneself as different from how one under stands oneself to be and from the person one wants to be. In fact, the identity of a person is fragile because it cannot be grounded in an impersonal otherness (biological, social, or cultural) or in an intimate sense of selfhood (pre-reflective or reflective). Rather, to be a person is the task of becoming the concrete person that one is through the encounter with the otherness that is an inescapable part of one’s identity.

Personhood

Seeing a Person The notion of personhood thus serves to make sense of the problem that our identity is a fact that is also a task. One could say that our identity is a normative fact. We are the bio logical organism that we are, but our experience of continuity is nevertheless a fact that is constantly disturbed. When we try to understand ourselves and to make sense of what we say and do, we are confronted with multifarious experiences of otherness that turn our identity into a question (Grøn 2017: 16–20). These experiences that disturb our sense of identity stem, as mentioned, from the opaque biology of our bodies, but also, and often more manifestly, from our own—more or less articulate—idea(l)s about the person that we would like to be, and from the way other people see us. My identity is a question not only about what I am and who I feel or think myself to be, it also depends upon my ideas about how—and sometimes even who—I would like to be and upon the way other people see me. This combination of descriptive and normative features makes personhood “a projected synthesis that seizes itself in the representation of a task, of an ideal of what the person should be” ( Ricoeur 1986: 86). In being the person that we are, we are confronted with the task of holding together, trying to make sense of, and living with what we are, who we want to be, and how other people see us. The notion of personhood involves the Korma Dive demand that we recognize and respect every human being as a person (Kant 1996b: 210–211). In this sense, all human beings are to be seen as persons. And yet, to be a per son is also to be a certain kind of person—both in our own eyes and in the eyes of other people. Persons are individuals, and as such they come in as many forms and shades as there are human beings. Persons are considerate, mean, passionate, dull, kind, reserved, good, melancholic, ambitious, shy, bad, obnoxious, outgoing, prying, invidious, cool, sin ere, joyful, anxious, reticent, and so on. It is this interplay of normative universality and descriptive individuality that makes seeing a person—ourselves as well as other people— a challenging task.

To see a person is to see an individual, concrete person who is more than what can be seen or explained. The notion of personhood serves, as mentioned, to make sense of the fragile character of human identity as a restless interplay of selfhood and otherness. This means that to see a human being as a person is, on the one hand, to respect this human being’s (p. 340) experience of being an autonomous self and, on the other, to acknowledge the limits of that autonomy. A person is responsible for the person that he or she is, and yet due to the constitutive otherness (e.g. body, world, other people) involved in the den sty of a person this responsibility is not a simple fact. In fact, trying to make sense of and appropriate the person that we have become is a task that plays a major role in the per son that we are, and the person that we will be.

Seeing a human being (ourselves as well as another) as a person is to see that human be ing as an autonomous and responsible person who is more than merely a product of (men tal, social, biological) causal factors. A person is autonomous in the sense that her sense of self is a fundamental part of her identity. And yet, to be a person is more than our sense of self. The way other people see us is constitutive of the person that I am. I am not entirely in control of how other people see me, and my identity as a person depends on Personhood their recognition and respect. My identity is in this sense out of my hands, as it is with re Aspect to the biological factors that make up who I am, and it is this interplay of autonomy and heteronomy that makes personal identity a question of appropriation. Being the per son that I am requires that I appropriate my identity. This appropriation is difficult be cause it involves appropriating both my own sense of who I am and the way that other people see me. Ricoeur argues that this appropriation always takes place through narra Dives, that is, through the stories that we tell about ourselves because “the vicissitudes of life... remain in search of narrative configuration” ( Ricoeur 2005: 103). Narratives help us to see the unique person that every human being is by articulating (some of) “the vices situde of life” that we cannot see. Personal narratives give voice to an autonomy that is repeated at risk of being forgotten, and it helps us to make sense of heteronomous as Sects of a human identity that the person is not responsible for. In this sense, narratives bring awareness to the interplay of normative universality (every human being is a per son) and descriptive individuality (every person is a certain kind of person) constitutive of being a person.

The normative demand involved in the notion of personhood is meant to secure a person’s autonomy. The demand to see a human being as an autonomous person is not only direct ed at our relation to other people. It also concerns the way we relate to ourselves. Being a person requires that I appropriate and take responsibility for the person that I am even though my identity is not entirely of my own making. To be a person is therefore a task that weighs heavily upon me, and which can become unbearable. Narratives can make us aware of the burden of identity and help us to make sense of the concrete problems that a person faces in her struggle for becoming the person that she, feels, understands, and wants herself to be.

Personal Suffering It is this articulation of the problems of identity that makes the notion of personhood vital to phenomenological psychopathology. The notion is particularly useful when it comes to making sense of and dealing with the alienating aspect of mental illnesses. The disturb Dance of self-awareness involved in mental illness often entails a sense of alienation and unbearable passivity. As Wolfgang Blankenburg argues, “[t]he dynamic of anonymized processes of disease overtakes the subject’s biography, and a human destiny becomes a ‘destiny of drives and impulses’ ” ( Blankenburg 1986: 98). Our identity is at stake in suf Bering. Our experience (p. 341) of being a self is troubled, and in severe cases it is so dra magically disturbed that we lose our sense of agency and ownership of our experiences and actions. And yet, “suffering is one of the most vivid forms of self-consciousness” (Ri coeur 1966: 450).

This ambiguity of suffering is constitutive of human identity. It is in and through suffering that we become the person that we are. In fact, the fragility of our identity is that which makes us that individual person that each and every one of us is. We are persons simply by being human, but we become the persons that we are through the challenges of suffer Personhood ing. Pain is not something that we simply feel. We are not mere passive victims of pain. Of course pain can be so excruciating that the experience is completely drained of thought and reflection. But in the afterglow of pain, thought re-emerges. We do something with what we feel. We relate ourselves to our feelings, or as Karl Jasper argues, we always po sition ourselves to our suffering (Jasper 1997: 414–427). In this sense, human suffering is always personal suffering. The notion of personhood can be of help when trying to make sense of how and why we suffer the way we do. In our attempts to describe and make sense of a person’s suffering, it allows us to maintain both the irreproducible de scriptive particularity of that person’s suffering and the normative demand involved in personal suffering, namely, that in suffering we are dealing with a struggle of and for au tonomy. This struggle is about appropriating and making sense of the unbearable passive ty involved in suffering. And although the ethical demand to be (and to recognize the oth er person as) an autonomous person who takes responsibility for one’s actions have a uni verbal aim, the particularity of suffering tells a story about the irreplaceable individual in front of us who suffers. As Eugène Minkowski notes, “[t]he human person forms herself in the crucible of suffering. Through suffering the person affirms herself; she looks beyond, she sees beyond” ( Minkowski 1999: 812; my translation). Understanding suffering as per Tonal suffering is not simple. It involves a recognition of the interplay of selfhood and oth erness in our self-awareness, the intimate alienation at the core of human identity that makes the person that we are a never-ending task. Minkowski argues that it is this Bambi gusty of suffering, a paralyzing passivity and active engagement, that makes our suffering personal: Suffering is an integral part of the human existence. Actually, it is more than a part; it marks existence and situates it. Suffering produces pain, and this is not a simple tautology. It hurts, and how! But it is a hurting that we do not know how to compare with any other. It takes place within the human “pathos,” and through this the human being recognizes her human aspect... We find our person pro Roundly engaged in suffering. Suffering is in us, and in suffering we get in touch with ourselves and with existence. It is not human misery, but human suffering.

(Minkowski 1999: 801; my translation)

Distinguishing suffering and misery is fundamental to phenomenological psychopathology because it allows both the patients and the mental health-care professional to recognize the patients as an autonomous person. While misery em phasizes the passivity of pain, suffering underscores the interplay of activity and passivity that makes human pain personal suffering. We engage with our suffering and with the world through suffering, as Minkowski argues, and in this engagement we are searching for the meaning(s) of our suffering. Suffering can be so unbearable that the patient is no longer able to see himself as a person. His sense of self can become so dramatically dis Curbed that his identity is submerged in anonymous and alienating processes of painful otherness. (p. 342) A narrative reconfiguration of his suffering structured around the no son of personhood can help the mental health professional recognize the patient as a per son, and the patient to appropriate his pain and make the otherness part of who he is.

Personhood

Suffering in this sense lets us see the individual person that we are through personal challenges that all human beings share. PAGE_BREAK Befindlichkeit: Disposition is a pivotal concept in Heidegger’s major work Being and Time. It initially appears in Heidegger’s writings as a translation of the Aristotelian no son of διάθεσις (disposition) but only during 1924–1927 does he develop a concept of dis position that constitutes a radicalization of the Husserlian phenomenological approach, in order to provide a concrete account of a phenomenological “beginning” and to offer a de Ascription of human being in terms of “living life.” Befindlichkeit stresses the basic state of Casein in its being situated: finding ourselves already in situatedness, means finding our selves gathered to a “there” (beingthere, in German Casein ). The situatedness is strictly related to the existence’s facticity and it becomes manifest to us through our own moods and affectivity. With the notion of Befindlichkeit we face important issues that are related to psychopathology and clinical practice, such as trauma, anxiety disorders, disembody Bent, and distortions of feelings.

Keywords: Befindlichkeit, disposition, situatedness, moods, affectivity, trauma, disembodiment # Introduction THIS chapter is dedicated to Befindlichkeit, a key concept expressed in Martin Heidegger’s work Being and Time. Befindlichkeit means “disposition,” both in terms of being-in-situation and being situated. In order to explain why disposition is of in Merest to mental health clinicians, I will show the link between disposition and situated Bess through three steps: the meaning of the “there” of “being-there” (following the Eng Dish translation of the German word Casein ); the meaning of situatedness; and the mean ing of moods in situatedness. Finally, I will show why disposition is related to psy chopathology and clinical practice.

Being and Time represents Martin Heidegger’s magnum opus. Published in 1927, it rapid ly became one of the most significant and controversial philosophical texts of the twenty eth century and it brought Heidegger international acclaim and notoriety, also confirming Befindlichkeit: Disposition 1 his distance from Husserl’s phenomenology. The genesis of Being and Time is well 2 known: San und Zit is left interrupted due to “a matter of language,” since the meta 3 physical language is (p. 345) not able to name what Being is. With Being and Time emerges the only question that will engage Heidegger’s thoughts for the rest of his life: the question of Being ( San ), in German Seinsfrage. The ontological question—what is the Being?—will cross the philosopher’s meditation as Ariadne’s thread and with his 1927 book Heidegger tries to answer this question with an analysis of the only being able to pose this question, the human being. However, it would be a mistake to consider Being and Time as an anthropological or psychological work on human being, since Heidegger’s intention is to provide an analysis of the ontological constitution of being using a phenom ecological approach. This is why Heidegger will use the word Casein— in English, beingthere—to pursue his goals.

What does Casein mean? It is not simply the German expression for “existence,” not equivalent to anthropos, not homo sapiens, not man in general, not human being and not even the transcendental consciousness; similarly, Casein is not the “I” or the ego. Rather Casein means the way through which human being has to be. For Heidegger being-there (Casein ) is not to be understood in terms of everyday human existence or embodied agency but—from his earliest Freiburg lectures onward—as an unfolding historical Lori zon or space of meaning that is already “there” ( Da ), prior to the emergence of the hu man body and its various capacities: “The Da in Being and Time does not mean a state Bent of place for a being, but rather it should designate the openness where beings can 4 be present for the human being, and the human being also for himself.” Heidegger in 5 Fists that Casein is not to be interpreted as a concrete subject, such as être-la, “here” in a determinate place. Casein is “there” prior to the practical involvements of the subject: “The ‘essence’ ( Ween ) of this entity lies in its ‘to be’ [Zu-Rein ]. Its Being-what-it-is [Was- 6 Rein ] (essential ) must... be conceived in terms of its Being ( existential ).” The first fea Cure of Casein is to have to be (zu-Rein) and its essence lies in its existence: “ Casein brings its ‘there’ along with it. If it lacks its ‘there’, it is not Tactically the entity which is Essen 7 sally Casein.” What does Casein mean? It is not simply the German expression for “existence,” not equivalent to anthropos, not homo sapiens, not man in general, not human being and not even the transcendental consciousness; similarly, Casein is not the “I” or the ego. Rather Casein means the way through which human being has to be. For Heidegger being-there (Casein ) is not to be understood in terms of everyday human existence or embodied agency but—from his earliest Freiburg lectures onward—as an unfolding historical Lori zon or space of meaning that is already “there” ( Da ), prior to the emergence of the hu man body and its various capacities: “The Da in Being and Time does not mean a state Bent of place for a being, but rather it should designate the openness where beings can 4 be present for the human being, and the human being also for himself.” Heidegger in 5 Fists that Casein is not to be interpreted as a concrete subject, such as être-la, “here” in a determinate place. Casein is “there” prior to the practical involvements of the subject: “The ‘essence’ ( Ween ) of this entity lies in its ‘to be’ [Zu-Rein ]. Its Being-what-it-is [Was- 6 Rein ] (essential ) must... be conceived in terms of its Being ( existential ).” The first fea Cure of Casein is to have to be (zu-Rein) and its essence lies in its existence: “ Casein brings its ‘there’ along with it. If it lacks its ‘there’, it is not Tactically the entity which is Essen 7 sally Casein.”

For Heidegger the fundamental state of Casein is its being-in-the-world: being-there and world are not separated but must be grasped together, avoiding the Cartesian dualism be tween subject and object and overcoming the subjectivism on which all Western philoso phy is based. Being-in-the-world is a unitary phenomenon that characterizes every Bela tionship; it is not a kind of “property” of human being, but rather the fundamental as Gumption of our existence: “ ‘Being-in’ is thus the formal existential expression for the Be 8 ing of Casein, which has Being-in-the-world as its essential state.” Human being’s pri Cordial being-in-the-world is not an abstraction but always a concrete occurrence. Its be ing-in-the-world occurs and fulfills itself only in and as the manifold particular modes of human behavior; this kind of being presupposes a unique openness of man’s existence. It has to be an openness into which (p. 346) the particular beings which man encounters can disclose themselves as the beings they are, phenomenologically, with all the context of their meaningful references.

Befindlichkeit: Disposition The basic state of Casein is its being situated, or in other words, its relationship with spa tiality: being-in-the-world stresses the topological feature of Casein, its being in a place and to be situated. The situatedness is a constant feature of Casein and “the primacy of such situatedness is to be found... in the question of the nature of such situatedness, 9 our own existence is itself brought into question.” Finding ourselves already into situate 10 Redness, means find ourselves gathered to a “there” (beingthere ). The way in which our situatedness arises is most clearly evident in the German word Casein, being-there: “By focusing on existence as ‘Casein’, Heidegger is able to draw attention to the way in which existence is indeed a matter of situatedness—to exist, to be ‘in the world’, is to have a 11 concrete ‘there’.” As Heidegger says, “by its very nature, Casein brings its ‘there’ along with it. If it lacks its ‘there’, it is not Tactically the entity which is essentially Casein; in 12 deed, it is not this entity at all. Casein is its disclosedness,... ‘Casein is its ‘there’.”

Disposition: The situatedness is strictly related to the existence’s facticity and it becomes manifest to us through our own moods and affectivity, through the way we “find our 13 selves,” what Heidegger calls Befindlichkeit, in English “disposition.” We find the notion of Befindlichkeit in the §29 of chapter 5 (I section) of Being and Time. Befindlichkeit first appears in Heidegger’s work as a translation of the Aristotelian notion of διάθεσις (dipso sition). It is in the years 1924–1927 that Heidegger develops a concept of disposition that constitutes a radicalization of the Husserlian phenomenological approach, in order to pro Aide a concrete account of a phenomenological “beginning” ( Anfang ) and to offer a de 14 Ascription of human being in terms of “living life” ( das Lebende ). Befindlichkeit is not a (p. 347) starting point in the context of Heidegger’s understanding of fundamental strum Cures of Casein, rather it is a point of arrival in his pathway toward phenomenology and its roots, precisely, into Heidegger’s relationship with Aristotle, a central point of his 15 philosophical education. According to Heidegger, Aristotle is the first philosopher to have investigated affects or passions (the πάθη) and to have stressed how human being is constitutively a being-in, because of this being is always determined by affects. Being-in indicates again a kind of situatedness, our being into an emotional state: “It is, above all, decisive that we lose composure, as in the case of fearing without encountering some thing in the environing world that could be the direct occasion of fear. In this being-matter-of-concern of the πάθη, corporeality is co-encountered in some mode or 16 another.” Disposition: The situatedness is strictly related to the existence’s facticity and it becomes manifest to us through our own moods and affectivity, through the way we “find our 13 selves,” what Heidegger calls Befindlichkeit, in English “disposition.” We find the notion of Befindlichkeit in the §29 of chapter 5 (I section) of Being and Time. Befindlichkeit first appears in Heidegger’s work as a translation of the Aristotelian notion of διάθεσις (dipso sition). It is in the years 1924–1927 that Heidegger develops a concept of disposition that constitutes a radicalization of the Husserlian phenomenological approach, in order to pro Aide a concrete account of a phenomenological “beginning” ( Anfang ) and to offer a de 14 Ascription of human being in terms of “living life” ( das Lebende ). Befindlichkeit is not a (p. 347) starting point in the context of Heidegger’s understanding of fundamental strum Cures of Casein, rather it is a point of arrival in his pathway toward phenomenology and its roots, precisely, into Heidegger’s relationship with Aristotle, a central point of his 15 philosophical education. According to Heidegger, Aristotle is the first philosopher to have investigated affects or passions (the πάθη) and to have stressed how human being is constitutively a being-in, because of this being is always determined by affects. Being-in indicates again a kind of situatedness, our being into an emotional state: “It is, above all, decisive that we lose composure, as in the case of fearing without encountering some thing in the environing world that could be the direct occasion of fear. In this being-matter-of-concern of the πάθη, corporeality is co-encountered in some mode or 16 another.”

In the summer 1924 lectures on Aristotle’s Rhetoric, Heidegger shows how philosophical logos and propositional judgment of philosophical discourse are both grounded in every day speech, originating from Tactical existence, in which situation, affects, and moods dis close the determination of Casein. Affect is thus a constitutive phenomenon of discursive disclosure and logos is a fundamental characteristic of the Casein whose capacity for meaningful disclosure is grounded in affect. In the discourse we find the disposition (διάθεσις) of the hearer and the importance of affects (πάθη). The affects play a fund mental role in the determination of being-in-the-world, of being-with-and-toward-others: “These πάθη, ‘affects,’... are concerned with a disposition of living things in their world, 17 in the mode of being positioned toward something, allowing a matter to matter to it.” In 18 these years Heidegger is working on the issue of living being: this is why Befindlichkeit: Disposition we find the language typical of philosophy of life ( Lebensphilosophie) such as in the lec Cure courses of 1918, The Idea of Philosophy and the Problem of Worldview and Phenom nology and Transcendental Philosophy Value, where Heidegger insists on the supremacy of life, understood as pre-theoretical, on the theoretical dimension: “This primacy of the theoretical must be broken, but not in order to proclaim the primacy of the practical, and not in order to (p. 348) introduce something that shows the problems from a new side, but 19 because the theoretical itself and as such refers back to something pre-theoretical.”

The philosophy of living being grounds Heidegger’s own understanding of Befindlichkeit, as an a prior constitutive part of Casein ’s facticity, together with moods ( Stimmungen ). According to Heidegger, it is through moods that we can know the world in general and the possibility of “truth.” Whereas modern philosophy holds that “truth” is a function of propositional logic, Heidegger argues that it is pre-predicative mood that “founds all 20 predicative truth.” Disposition expresses the fact that human beings are always situated into a mood and always opened to the world. For these reasons, Heidegger argues that Befindlichkeit, as an ontological structure, discloses the Antic experience of the world 21 through moods. Befindlichkeit is a “fundamental existential,” namely it is a basic xis tential way in which Casein is its “there.” Heidegger writes: “In having a mood, Casein is always disclosed mood wise as that entity to which it has been delivered over in its Being; and in this way it has been delivered over to the Being which, in existing, it has to be. ‘To 22 be disclosed’ does not mean ‘to be known as this sort of thing’.” According to Heideg ger, moods are not a kind of psychological state that we experience within a given world. Mood is a “background through which it is possible to encounter things in the ways that 23 we do, as ‘there’, ‘not there’, ‘mattering’, ‘not mattering’, ‘for this’ or ‘for that’.” Heideggerian moods have neither an “internal” nor an “external” phenomenology: “A mood assails us. It comes neither from ‘outside’ nor from ‘inside’, but arises out of Beingin-the-world, as a way of such Being.... The mood has already disclosed, in every case, Being-in-the-world as a whole and makes it possible first of all to direct oneself towards 24 something.” A mood is a “background to all specifically directed intentional states. It is part of the structure of intentionality and is presupposed by the possibility of encounter 25 ing anything in experience or thought.” Even though moods are considered to be psy chological phenomena, Heidegger insists on the fact that psychology is not able to grasp the ontological importance of mood under the light of an ontological perspective. He writes: “Having a mood is not related to the psychical in the first instance, and is not it self an inner condition.... It is in this that the second essential characteristic of statesof-mind shows itself. We have seen that the world, Casein -with, and existence are equipri Cordially (p. 349) disclosed; and state-of-mind is a basic existential species of their dis 26 closeness, because this disclosedness itself is essentially Being-in-the-world.” The philosophy of living being grounds Heidegger’s own understanding of Befindlichkeit, as an a prior constitutive part of Casein ’s facticity, together with moods ( Stimmungen ). According to Heidegger, it is through moods that we can know the world in general and the possibility of “truth.” Whereas modern philosophy holds that “truth” is a function of propositional logic, Heidegger argues that it is pre-predicative mood that “founds all 20 predicative truth.” Disposition expresses the fact that human beings are always situated into a mood and always opened to the world. For these reasons, Heidegger argues that Befindlichkeit, as an ontological structure, discloses the Antic experience of the world 21 through moods. Befindlichkeit is a “fundamental existential,” namely it is a basic xis tential way in which Casein is its “there.” Heidegger writes: “In having a mood, Casein is always disclosed mood wise as that entity to which it has been delivered over in its Being; and in this way it has been delivered over to the Being which, in existing, it has to be. ‘To 22 be disclosed’ does not mean ‘to be known as this sort of thing’.” According to Heideg ger, moods are not a kind of psychological state that we experience within a given world. Mood is a “background through which it is possible to encounter things in the ways that 23 we do, as ‘there’, ‘not there’, ‘mattering’, ‘not mattering’, ‘for this’ or ‘for that’.” Heideggerian moods have neither an “internal” nor an “external” phenomenology: “A mood assails us. It comes neither from ‘outside’ nor from ‘inside’, but arises out of Beingin-the-world, as a way of such Being.... The mood has already disclosed, in every case, Being-in-the-world as a whole and makes it possible first of all to direct oneself towards 24 something.” A mood is a “background to all specifically directed intentional states. It is part of the structure of intentionality and is presupposed by the possibility of encounter 25 ing anything in experience or thought.” Even though moods are considered to be psy chological phenomena, Heidegger insists on the fact that psychology is not able to grasp the ontological importance of mood under the light of an ontological perspective. He writes: “Having a mood is not related to the psychical in the first instance, and is not it self an inner condition.... It is in this that the second essential characteristic of statesof-mind shows itself. We have seen that the world, Casein -with, and existence are equipri Cordially (p. 349) disclosed; and state-of-mind is a basic existential species of their dis 26 closeness, because this disclosedness itself is essentially Being-in-the-world.”

Befindlichkeit works on two levels: on one hand, it shows how Casein is essentially always disclosed to the world, to others and to entities; on the other hand, it shows how Casein is always orientated toward both a horizontal and a vertical axis. Every mood and all copse quential feelings activate this double axis and illuminate Casein ’s ability to understand of 27 itself, its existence, its being-with the others ( Mit-Rein), and its way of behaving. Heidegger identifies three ontological features of Befindlichkeit: the first is that it discos Befindlichkeit: Disposition es to Casein its thrownness; the second is that moods disclose being-in-the-world as a whole, and third is that Befindlichkeit implies a disclosive submission to the world, out of which we can encounter something that matters to us.

Fear, anxiety and psychopathology: In §30 of chapter 5 of Being and Time, Heidegger ana 28 lazes the phenomenon of fear ( Furcht ) and in §40 the phenomenon of anxiety ( Angst ), as modes of Befindlichkeit. Fear has always an object and according to Heidegger it is al ways characterized by three elements: what in the face of which we fear, fearing, and what about which we fear. On the contrary, anxiety is characterized by the ab Fence of a definite object. Anxiety blocks any possibility to be open to others and to situ sons. Anxiety breaks the transparency of self-constitution and the human being loses its capacity to recognize itself in relation to others: “Anxiety thus takes away from Casein the 29 possibility of understanding itself, as it falls in terms of the ‘world’.” In anxiety, “one has an ‘uncanny’ feeling. Here the peculiar indefiniteness of that which Casein finds itself in Solved with anxiety initially finds expression: the nothing and nowhere. But uncanniness 30 means at the same time not-being-at-home.” In anxiety Casein faces with its own “un canniness,” the mode of not-being-at-home ( Unheimlich ) and this can be experienced as a kind of disconnection from reality. Anxiety is the collapse of the meaning of life and it is interpreted as a pulling away from nothingness, as Heidegger writes in What is Meta physics?: “Anxiety does not let such confusion arise. Much to the contrary, a ecu liar calm pervades it.... The indeterminateness of that in the face of which and for which we become anxious is no mere lack of determination but rather the essential impossibility of determining it.... In anxiety, we say, ‘one feels ill at ease.’... All things and we our selves sink into indifference. This, however, not in the sense of mere disappearance.

31 Rather in this very receding, things turn toward us.... Anxiety reveals the nothing.” However, anxiety also has a positive meaning, since it discloses Casein as being-possible. It means that anxiety makes manifest in Casein its “being towards its own most potential ty-for-Being-that is, its being-free for the freedom of choosing itself and taking hold of it 32 self.” Anxiety brings Casein face to face with its being free for the authenticity of its be ing, and for this authenticity as a possibility which it always is. Befindlichkeit also illumi antes the relationship with the others (human beings, entities, (p. 350) word, nature, etc.): 33 working on the ontological disclosure of Casein, it increases our ability to feel empathy (Einfühlung ) as consequence of the constitutive being-with the others ( Mit-Rein ) of Casein.

Why is disposition related to psychopathology and clinical practice and why is it of inter est to mental health clinicians? At first sight we may think we are faced only with a tho retinal construction that has nothing to do with mental health or psychopathology: with some little exception for the Zollikon seminars, Heidegger is usually considered a philoso fer who is not so interested in issues connected to mental health. However, this is a prejudice that needs to be broken, going directly to his works. With the notion of Behind lichkeit we are faced with four important issues that are connected with psychopathology and with phenomenological psychopathology: first, we are faced with the constitutive sit Cation (or ontological, using Heidegger’s word) of being into situation and being situated, typical of every human being. These features stress how our existence and also our health are never disembodied from the situation in which we find ourselves: the situatedness is Befindlichkeit: Disposition the prominent peculiarity of our life and it shows the kind of relationship we have with ourselves and with the world around us.

In second place, Befindlichkeit shows that situatedness is always aimed to openness: be ing open toward others, toward events, also toward illness allows human being to search for meanings and possibilities of understanding, to face delusions and to break the wall of sufferance that can paralyze people affected by mental disorders or who have expert Inced a trauma. For example, in the frame of emotional trauma, such as grief, the unity of temporality is devastatingly disturbed: people are frozen in an eternal present in which they remain forever trapped, or to which they are condemned to be perpetually 34 returned. Faced with loss, a sense of a foreshortened future pervades human being and does’t allow us to distinguish the experience of time itself from the experience of tempo 35 ral properties. A traumatic event or situation creates psychological trauma when it overwhelms the individual’s ability to cope, and leaves that person fearing death, annihi Cation, mutilation, or psychosis. The individual may feel emotionally, cognitively, and phys ically overwhelmed. Trauma comes in many forms, and there are vast differences among people who experience trauma. Both in trauma and in psychopathological phenomena (i.e. depression, anxiety) the sense of life is altered; this alteration is not only related to the content of what has happened, but is also a formal alteration insofar as the expert Once of being determined by the past and of how it is resolved undergoes a profound change, which has a bearing on everything in the past, consolidating memory falsifica sons and fabrications. Traumatic events usually elicit a closure of human being not more able to recognize its constitutive openness and breaking trust in interpersonal relation ships.

In the third place, Heidegger’s interpretation of anxiety, in the frame of modes of Behind lichkeit, approaches the human being and its suffering from a phenomenological (p. 351) point of view. By anxiety Heidegger does not mean common anxiousness which is Multi Lately reducible to fearfulness, but rather the fundamental characteristic that shows us who we really are, what our lives are really about, and our possibility to choose what is really important in our existence. In anxiety we lose the experience of our ordinary identi ty, we are frozen and we cannot feel “at home” in the world. Anxiety seems to mean a breakdown of all ordinary understanding and activity in the space of a moment. The alien Cation that comes from this hiatus—being-in-the-world and yet feeling one is not-being-athome in the world—shows us that the world, in this particular moment, has nothing to of fer us. The possibility of the future loses its meaning and the world suddenly falls away. Anxiety shows the horizon of being in which Casein manifests itself as the possibility in which man encounters what is most essential in itself.

Finally, in the fourth place, disposition illuminates the understanding of moods ( Sim munged ) and the relationship between feelings ( Gefühle ) and emotions ( Emotionen ). Moods and feelings are the grounds of our experience of reality and more generally of the world. According to Heidegger it is the mood that attunes one to the world and gives meaning—this is why in anxiety, as noted earlier, the world collapses completely. Heidegger’s conception of moods and their phenomenology provide some support in psy Befindlichkeit: Disposition chopathology: for example, Sass suggests that schizophrenia involves a general diminution of bodily feelings, accompanied by exaggeration of specific Effective respond 36 es; Stanghellini stresses the role played by changes in feelings and observes that distortions of feeling, in the sense of disembodiment, are a source of altered experience— 37 the feeling of being disconnected to oneself.

Under this light, Heidegger’s notion of disposition can help psychopathology in providing a new paradigm for understanding both the human being and the pathologies of xis Fence: “Paramount in Heidegger’s contribution was his insistence on the structural unity of Casein, which has introduced into phenomenological clinical psychology a framework for interpreting psychopathological phenomena within the context of the person’s beingin-the-world as a whole, a scope scarcely approached in academic psychology. In other words, phenomenological psychologists now use philosophical resources to move beyond 38 the description of more or less isolated mental states to the gestalt “existence”. Heidegger seeks interpretively to restore the unity of our being, split asunder in Harte Xian dualism. His analysis of the human being is the reconstitution of a whole: the point is not to reconstitute the Antic process of a causal series of events but to see the ontological 39 unit of an articulated multiplicity.

Bibliography Beaufret J.. Husserl et Heidegger. In Dialogue ave Heidegger third. Paris: Les Edi sons de Minuit.

Benet R.. “Transcendence et intentionalité: Heidegger et Husserl sur les prolé gomènes d’une ontologie phénoménologique.” In F. Volpi, et al. (eating disorders.), Heidegger et l’Idle de la phenomenology, pp. 195–215. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Blattner W.. Heidegger’s Being and Time. New York: Continuum.

Baedeker E. C.. “Phenomenology.” In Hubert L. Dreyfus and Mark A. Wrathall (eating disorders.), A Companion to Heidegger, pp. 156–172. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

Brencio F.. “Heidegger and Binswanger: Just a Misunderstanding?” The Humans tic Psychologist 43: 278–296.

Brencio F.. “World, Time and Anxiety. Heidegger’s Existential Analytic and Psych try.” Folic Media 56: 297–304.

Brogan W. W.. Heidegger and Aristotle: The Twofoldness of Being. New York: SUNY.

Coriando P. L.. Affektenlehre und Phänomenologie der Stimmungen: Wage Diner Ontologie und Ethic des Emotionalen. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann Verlag.

Cowell S. G.. Husserl, Heidegger, and the Space of Meaning: Paths Toward Tran scendental, Phenomenology. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Befindlichkeit: Disposition Cowell S. G.. “Heidegger and Husserl: The Matter and Method of Philosophy.” In Hubert L. Dreyfus and Mark A. Wrathall (eating disorders.), A Companion to Heidegger, pp. 49–64. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

Elpidorou A. and Freeman L.. “Affectivity in Heidegger I: Moods and Emotions in Being and Time.” Philosophy Compass 10: 661–671.

Hadjioannou C.. “Befindlichkeit as Retrieval of Aristotelian διάθεσις: Heidegger Reading Aristotle in the Marburg Years.” In T. Ceiling (ed.), Heidegger’s Marburger Zit: Theme, Argument, Konstellationen, pp. 223–236. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann Ver lag.

Heidegger M.. Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson. New York: Harper & Row [ San und Zit, Hrs. von F.-W. von Herrmann, Klostermann Verlag, Frank Burt am Main 1977, Gesamtausgabe 2].

Heidegger M.. “Letter on Humanism.” In Pathmarks, pp. 239–276, edited by W. McNeil. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press [ Brief über den Humanism's, in Weg Darken, Hrs. Von F.-W. von Herrmann, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 2004, Gesamtausgabe 9].

Heidegger M.. Zollikon Seminars, trans. F. Mar and R. Assay. Evanston: North western University Press [ Zollikoner Seminar, Hrs. von M. Boss, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 1994, Gesamtausgabe 89].

Heidegger M.. Towards the Definition of Philosophy, trans. T. Saddler. London: Con tinuum, 2002 [ Zur Bestimmung der Philosophic, Hrs. von B. Heimbüchel, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 1999, Gesamtausgabe 56/57].

Heidegger M.. Basic Concepts of Aristotelian Philosophy, trans. R. D. Metcalf and M. B. Tanker. Bloomington: Indiana University Press [ Grundbegriffe der aristotelischen Philosophic, Hrs. Von M. Michalski, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 2002, Gesamtausgabe 18].

Held K.. “Fundamental Moods and Heidegger’s Critique of Contemporary Cul Cure.” In J. Wallis (ed.), Reading Heidegger: Commemorations, pp. 286–303. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.

(p. 353) Hopkins B.. Intentionality in Husserl and Heidegger: The Problem of the Original Method and Phenomenon of Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Pub Fishers.

Husserl E.. Letters to Roman Ingarden. The Hague, Martins Nijhoff.

Husserl E.. “Randbemerkungen Husserl zu Heidegger San und Zit und Kant und das Problem der Metaphisik.” Husserl Studies 11: 3–63.

Befindlichkeit: Disposition Husserl E.. Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology and the Confront son with Heidegger. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Keller P.. Husserl and Heidegger on Human Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Diesel T.. The Genesis of Heidegger’s Being and Time. Barkley: University of Cali fornia Press.

Malpass J.. Heidegger’s Topology. Being, Place, World. Cambridge, MA: The MIT.

Radcliffe M.. “Existential Feeling and Psychopathology.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 16: 179–194.

Radcliffe M.. “The Phenomenology of Moods and the Meaning of Life.” In Peter Goldie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Emotion, pp. 349–371. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Radcliffe M.. “The Phenomenology and Neurobiology of Moods and Emotions.” In D. Schmicking and S. Gallagher (eating disorders.), Handbook of Phenomenology and Cognitive Sciences, pp. 123–140. Berlin: Stringer.

Radcliffe M.. “Why Moods Matter.” In Mark A. Wrathall (ed.), The Cambridge Com anion to Heidegger’s Being and Time, pp. 157–176. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Radcliffe M., Ruddell M., and Smith B.. “What is a ‘Sense of Foreshortened Fu Cure?’ A Phenomenological Study of Trauma, Trust, and Time.” Frontiers in Psychology 5: 1–11.

Richardson W. J.. Heidegger. Through Phenomenology to Thought. Dordrecht: Stringer.

Sass L.. The Paradoxes of Delusion: Wittgenstein, Schreber and the Schizophrenic Mind. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Stanghellini G.. Disembodied Spirits and Reanimated Bodies: The Psychopathology of Common Sense. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Stapleton T.. Husserl and Heidegger: The Question of a Phenomenological Begin Ding. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Stolorow R.. Trauma and Existence. New York: Francis and Taylor.

Taminiaux J.. “The Husserlian Heritage in Heidegger’s Notion of the Self.” In T. Kisiel and J. van Burn (eating disorders.), Reading Heidegger from the Start: Essays in his Earliest Thought, pp. 269–290. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Van Burn J.. The Young Heidegger. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Befindlichkeit: Disposition Volpi F.. Heidegger e Aristotle. Padova: Daphne Editrice.

von Herman F.-W.. Der Begriff der Phänomenologie bei Heidegger und Husserl. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann Verlag.

von Herrmann F.-W.. Hermeneutische Phänomenologie des Daseins. Cine Er läuterung von “San und Zit.” Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann Verlag. (3 volumes).

Notes:

1 ( ) On this topic, see Husserl E.. Letters to Roman Ingarden. The Hague, Martins Nijhoff; Husserl E.. “Randbemerkungen Husserl zu Heidegger San und Zit und Kant und das Problem der Metaphisik.” Husserl Studies 11, pp. 3-63; Husserl E.. Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology and the Confrontation with Heidegger. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Due to the abundance of critical literature on this issue, I refer the reader to Baedeker E. C.. “Phenomenology.” In Hubert L. Dreyfus and Mark A. Wrathall (eating disorders.), A Companion to Heidegger, pp. 156–172. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing; Cowell S. G.. Husserl, Heidegger, and the Space of Meaning: Paths Toward Transcendental, Phenomenology. Evanston: Northwestern Uni varsity Press; Cowell S. G.. “Heidegger and Husserl: The Matter and Method of Philosophy.” In Hubert L. Dreyfus and Mark A. Wrathall (eating disorders.), A Companion to Heideg ger, pp. 49–64. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing; Stapleton T.. Husserl and Heidegger: The Question of a Phenomenological Beginning. Albany: State University of New York Press.

2 ( ) See Diesel T.. The Genesis of Heidegger’s Being and Time. Barkley: University of California Press.

3 ( ) Cf. M. Heidegger, Letter on Humanism, in Pathmarks, edited by W. McNeil, Cam bridge University Press, 1998, pp. 249–250 [ Brief über den Humanism's, in Wegmarken, Hrs. von F.-W. von Herrmann, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 2004, Gesamtaus Babe 9].

4 ( ) M. Heidegger, Zollikon Seminars, trans. F. Mar and R. Assay, Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2001, p. 120 [ Zollikoner Seminar, Hrs. von M. Boss, Klostermann Ver lag, Frankfurt am Main 1994, Gesamtausgabe 89].

5 ( ) Cf. M. Heidegger, Zollikon Seminars, p. 120.

6 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson, (New York: Harp er & Row, 1962), [ San und Zit, Hrs. von F.-W. von Herrmann, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 1977, Gesamtausgabe 2]. p. 67.

7 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 133.

8 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, pp. 78–79.

Befindlichkeit: Disposition 9 ( ) J. Malpass, Heidegger’s Topology. Being, Place, World, The MIT Press, Cambridge Massachusetts 2006, p. 41.

10 ( ) “To translate ‘Casein’ as ‘being-there,’ while it does mean that the sense of ‘here’ that can be involved with ‘ Da ’ is lost, nevertheless makes clear the way in which Casein is in deed a mode of being that is characterized by its ‘there’—it is its there— although how this ‘there’ is to be understood remains itself in question,” J. Malpass, Heidegger’s Topolo gy. Being, Place, World, p. 50.

11 ( ) J. Malpass, Heidegger’s Topology. Being, Place, World, p. 47.

12 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 171.

13 ( ) The word Befindlichkeit is one of the most difficult to translate in English. In the es say entitled “Affectivity in Heidegger I: Moods and Emotions in Being and Time,” Andres Elpidorou and Lauren Freeman provide a broad account of how Befindlichkeit has been translated into English by various scholars, such as “state of mind,” “findingness,” “affect tivity,” “disposition,” “attunement,” and many others. For a detailed reconstruction of the different translations, cf. A. Elpidorou and L. Freeman, “Affectivity in Heidegger I: Moods and Emotions in Being and Time,” Philosophy Compass, vol. 10, issue 10, 2015, pp. 661– 671. My choice to translate Befindlichkeit with “disposition” is due to the use of the Ger man reflexive verb site befinden, which literally means “finding oneself.” In the ordinary way of speaking, the colloquial sentence “Wie befinden Sie site?” means “how is it go ing?” or “how do you feel?” etc. In everyday language this expression refers to the situ son in which someone finds him/herself situated. It is starting from this situated expert Once that the world and some entities in the world are disclosed to Casein: the “dispose son” is both this being into a situatedness, as ontological and constitutive dimension, and being open to the world. “Disposition” is the key to transcendence and to openness, as we will see later in the chapter.

14 ( ) Cf. Beaufret J. Husserl et Heidegger. In Dialogue ave Heidegger third. Paris: Les Editions de Minuit; Benet R.. “Transcendence et intentionalité: Heidegger et Husserl sur les prolegomènes d’une ontologie phénoménologique.” In F. Volpi et al. (eating disorders.), Heidegger et l’Idle de la phenomenology, pp. 195–215. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Pub Fishers; Hopkins B.. Intentionality in Husserl and Heidegger: The Problem of the Original Method and Phenomenon of Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Pub Fishers; Keller P.. Husserl and Heidegger on Human Experience. Cambridge: Cam bridge University Press; Richardson W. J.. Heidegger. Through Phenomenology to Thought. Dordrecht: Stringer; Taminiaux J.. “The Husserlian Heritage in Heidegger’s Notion of the Self.” In T. Kisiel and J. van Burn (eating disorders.), Reading Heidegger from the Start: Essays in his Earliest Thought. Albany: State University of New York Press; von Herman F.-W.. Der Begriff der Phänomenologie bei Heidegger und Husserl. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann Verlag.

Befindlichkeit: Disposition 15 ( ) The lecture Phänomenologische Interpretationen zu Aristoteles: Einführung in die Phänomenologische Forschung (winter semester 1921–1922), the course entitled Grand begriffe der aristotelischen Philosophic, and the lecture Platen: Sophists (winter semester 1924–1925) are important pathways of Heidegger’s under standing of the Aristotelian concepts πάθη (affects) and διάθεσις (disposition). On this topic cf. C. Hadjioannou, “ Befindlichkeit as Retrieval of Aristotelian διάθεσις: Heidegger Reading Aristotle in the Marburg Years, ” in T. Ceiling (ed.), Heidegger Marburger Zit: Theme, Argument, Konstellationen, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 2013, pp. 223–236; F. Volpi, Heidegger e Aristotle, Padova: Daphne Editrice, 1984; W. Walter Bro gan, Heidegger and Aristotle: The Twofoldness of Being, New York: SUNY, 2005.

16 ( ) M. Heidegger, Basic Concepts of Aristotelian Philosophy, translated by R. D. Metcalf and M. B. Tanker, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009, pp. 139–140 [ Grundbe griffe der aristotelischen Philosophic, Hrs. Von M. Michalski, Klostermann Verlag, Flak Burt am Main 2002, Gesamtausgabe 18].

17 ( ) M. Heidegger, Basic Concepts of Aristotelian Philosophy, p. 83. Cf. P. L. Coriando, Af fektenlehre und Phänomenologie der Stimmungen: Wage Diner Ontologie und Ethic des Emotionalen, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 2002, pp. 91–116.

18 ( ) See Van Burn J.. The Young Heidegger. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

19 ( ) M. Heidegger, Towards the Definition of Philosophy, translated by T. Saddler, London, Continuum, 2002, p. 47 [ Zur Bestimmung der Philosophy e, Hrs. von B. Heimbüchel, Klostermann Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 1999, Gesamtausgabe 56/57].

20 ( ) Cf. K. Held, “Fundamental Moods and Heidegger’s Critique of Contemporary Cul Cure,” in J. Wallis (ed.) Reading Heidegger: Commemorations, Indianapolis: Indiana Uni varsity Press, 1993, pp. 28–30.

21 ( ) Cf. M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 173.

22 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 173.

23 ( ) M. Radcliffe, “The Phenomenology and Neurobiology of Moods and Emotions,” in D. Schmicking and S. Gallagher (eating disorders.), Handbook of Phenomenology and Cognitive Sciences, Stringer 2010, p. 128.

24 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 176 25 ( ) M. Radcliffe, The Phenomenology and Neurobiology of Moods and Emotions, p. 128. On this topic I refer the reader also to Radcliffe M.. “Existential Feeling and Psy chopathology.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 16: 179–194; Radcliffe M.. “The Phenomenology of Moods and the Meaning of Life.” In Peter Goldie (ed.), The Ox ford Handbook of Philosophy of Emotion, pp. 349–371. Oxford: Oxford University Press; Befindlichkeit: Disposition Radcliffe M.. “Why Moods Matter.” In Mark A. Wrathall (ed.), The Cambridge Com anion to Heidegger’s Being and Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

26 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 176.

27 ( ) Cf. P. L. Coriando, Affektenlehre und Phänomenologie der Stimmungen: Wage Diner Ontologie und Ethic des Emotionalen, pp. 1–10, 117–153; F.-W. von Herrmann, Hermeneutische Phänomenologie des Daseins. Cine Erläuterung von “San und Zit,” vol. 3, pp. 28–45.

28 ( ) Cf. M. Heidegger, Being and Time, pp. 179–182.

29 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 231.

30 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 188.

31 ( ) M. Heidegger, “ What is Metaphysics? ” in Pathmarks, p. 88.

32 ( ) M. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 232.

33 ( ) F. Brencio, “Heidegger and Binswanger: Just a Misunderstanding?” The Humanistic Psychologist, vol. 43, issue 3, 2015, pp. 278–296.

34 ( ) Cf. R. Stolorow, Trauma and Existence, New York: Francis and Taylor 2007.

35 ( ) Cf. M. Radcliffe, M. Ruddell, and B. Smith, “What is a “Sense of Foreshortened Fu Cure?” A Phenomenological Study of Trauma, Trust, and Time,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 5, 2014, pp. 1–11.

36 ( ) Cf. L. Sass, The Paradoxes of Delusion: Wittgenstein, Schreber and the Schizophrenic Mind, Ithaca, Cornell University Press 1994.

37 ( ) Cf. G. Stanghellini, Disembodied Spirits and Reanimated Bodies: The Psychopatholo gy of Common Sense, Oxford, Oxford University Press 2004.

38 ( ) F. J. Hertz, “Phenomenological Currents in Twentieth-Century Psychology,” in H. L. Dreyfus and M. A. Wrathall (eating disorders.), A Companion to Phenomenology and Existentialism, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing 2006, pp. 401–402.

39 ( ) F. Brencio, “World, Time and Anxiety. Heidegger’s Existential Analytic and Psychic try,” Folic Media, vol. 56, issue 4, pp. 297–304.

Francesca Brencio School of Humanities and Communication Arts, Western Sydney University Values and Values-based Practice Values and Values-based Practice K.W.M. Fulford and Giovanni Stanghellini The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article describes the contribution of phenomenology to values-based practice in men tal health through two case studies, respectively of delusion and anorexia. Taken together these case studies show the need in psychopathology for a combined values-based pram ice drawing equally on the resources of phenomenology and of analytic philosophy of val ues. The essay outlines the resources for further development of such a combined valuesbased practice respectively from phenomenological psychopathology (illustrated by re search on schizophrenia) and the phenomenology of values (illustrated by the work of Husserl, Schemer, and Ricouer). The article concludes with an indication of the extent to which analytic philosophy of values and phenomenology are natural partners in the Bevel opment of a combined analytic/phenomenological, values-based practice fit for purpose in meeting the particular values challenges of psychopathology.

Keywords: analytic philosophy, anorexia nervosa, phenomenology, schizophrenia, values, values-based practice # Introduction “VALUES” is one of those terms that, although familiar in everyday discourse, has no set led meaning. Values are “what matters” or that which “is important.” But what matters or is important covers a diversity of concepts (such as needs, wishes, preferences, strengths, limitations, and virtues) the meanings of which are both individually complex (reflecting as they do the variety of personal, cultural, and historical values) and collect Lively conflicting (what we need and what we want, e.g. are often in conflict).

The diverse meanings of “values” are reflected in a corresponding diversity of philosophy cal and phenomenological accounts. It would take a much longer chapter than this even to list the variety of these accounts let alone do justice to the many insights they offer. Rather than attempting anything in the way of a comprehensive review, therefore, we fo cus on the challenges presented by values in psychopathology and the resources of val ues-based practice in responding to them. We describe two case studies, respectively of Values and Values-based Practice delusion and of anorexia, and then consider the extent to which these are capable of wider generalization drawing on the resources of phenomenological psychopathology and the phenomenology of values.

First Case Study: Simon’s Story Simon was a black, American lawyer threatened by legal action from a group of colleagues. Although he had long since given up his religious faith, he respond ed to this crisis by praying at a small altar that he set up in his front room. After an emotional evening’s “outpouring”, he discovered that the candle wax had run down marking certain words and phrases of his bible. The marked passages meant nothing to Simon’s peers but he interpreted them as a direct communication from God signifying that “I am the living son of David...”

Simon’s experiences are consistent with “delusional perception” as defined in psychiatric diagnostic schedules such as the PSE (Present State Examination) (Wing, Cooper, (p. 355) and Sartorius 1974). Delusional perception in DSM (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual) (American Psychiatric Association (American Psychiatric Association) 2013) is among the Criterion A symptoms for schizophrenia. Yet in Simon’s case his experiences turned out to be empowering rather than disabling. Guided by the marked passages in his bible from this and subsequent sim liar episodes Simon won his case, his reputation soared, and he went on to establish a re search trust for the study of religious experience.

The Challenge of Values in Simon’s Story How the positive outcome of Simon’s story should be understood takes us straight to the challenge of values in psychiatric diagnosis. Why? Because the difference between a jag noses of psychotic disorder and religious experience in Simon’s case lies not in his expert Fences as such but in how their effects on his life are evaluated. In DSM a diagnosis of schizophrenia requires that in addition to one or more Criterion A symptoms (such as delusional perception) the person concerned should also satisfy a criterion of clinical sig nificance, Criterion B. To satisfy Criterion B the person concerned must show a ‘level of functioning in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or selfcare, (that) is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (American Psychiatric Association 2013: 99). Si mon, therefore, although satisfying Criterion A, does not on the information available sat iffy Criterion B, for although he was indeed functioning differently as a result of his exp riences, his functioning (as a lawyer) was above rather than (as required by Criterion B) below the level achieved prior to the onset.

But this is where values come in. For DSM’s Criterion B is a value criterion: it requires not just a change in Simon’s functioning but one or more value judgments about whether any change is above the level previously achieved (i.e. a change for the better = not ill) or below that level (i.e. a change for the worse = ill). It may be of course that with further in formation the diagnostic picture will become less clear-cut. His interpersonal functioning, Values and Values-based Practice for example, might have taken a turn for the worse. But this reinforces the evaluative na Cure of Criterion B. For this mixed picture then requires evaluations not merely of Simon’s level of functioning within any one area (work functioning in this instance) but between other areas as well (enhanced work functioning versus deterioration in interper Tonal relations).

Simon’s story is the tip of a values iceberg; values are critical too in other areas of psy chopathology such as depression (Fulford et al. forthcoming); and values of various kinds occur throughout both DSM and ICD. But values are teal longing. They are challenging for theory: they raise questions about the very status of mental disorder that in turn beg deep underlying questions about the relationship be tween evaluative and descriptive meaning. Values are challenging too for empirical research. And they are challenging above all clinically in the balanced (diagnostic as well as therapeutic) jug Bents they entail. Getting the balance wrong is an important factor driving abuses of psy chiatry. Getting the balance right on the oth er hand is a key factor in contemporary person-centered approaches to psychiatric care based on co-production and recovery of individual quality of life. So how do we go about getting the balance of values right? (p. 356)

Responding to the Challenge: Analytic Process Getting the balance right starts with taking the significance of values in psychiatric jag noses seriously. For some, like Thomas Szasz, for example, psychiatric diagnostic values show psychiatry to be outwith medical science. For others, such as R. E. Wendell and Christopher Boors, they show that psychiatric science is at a primitive stage of development. Neither approach amounts to a basis for taking the val ues in question seriously (other than by way of elimination). Work in analytic philosophy of values by contrast takes these same values fully seriously in showing them to be a re Election of the diversity of human values and as such fully consistent with the science of medicine.

The work in question is derived from the mid-twentieth-century “Oxford School” of ordi nary language philosophy exemplified by J. L. Austin (1956–1957 ), R. M. Hare, and others. Work in this tradition, applied to medicine, shows that values are implicit in all medical diagnostic concepts but become visible only in areas like psychiatry where the values in question are diverse and hence tend to come into conflict. In other words values are in this respect like the air we breathe—everywhere and everywhere im portent but noticed only when (as when the air is in short supply) we have difficulty breathing. So understood therefore the visibility of values in psychiatric diagnosis is a mark neither of psychiatry being outwith medical science (as Szasz thought) nor of some supposed deficiency in psychiatric science (as Wendell, Boors, and others argued) but rather of the diversity of human values in the areas of human experience and behavior Values and Values-based Practice (such as belief, desire, volition, motivation, identity, sexuality, and so forth) with which psychiatry is characteristically concerned.

The practical counterpart of this analytically derived way of understanding psychiatric di agnostic values is a skills-based approach to balanced clinical decision-making called val ues-based practice. Far from being anti-scientific, values-based practice so derived is a partner to evidence-based practice. Values-based practice, as Figure 40. indicates, relies on learnable clinical skills and other process elements that, together with evidence-based practice, support balanced decision-making in individual cases within frameworks of shared values. (See generally, Fulford, Pale, and Carroll 2012.)

En el document/libro hay una tabla/figure/esquema que se Suede resumir Como Figure 40. A summary of values-based practice.

(p. 357) There are many other resources for working with values in medicine: ethics, health economics, decision analysis, and so forth. The role of values-based practice among these other resources remains controversial but it is nonetheless currently being successfully applied in a number of areas particularly of bodily medicine such as surgery. Progress in mental health, however, despite a num ber of well-supported initiatives, has been slower. There are various reasons for this. What these come down to is that the particular diversity of values in mental health makes them in various respects more challenging than their counterparts in bodily medicine. Our second case study illustrates one particular aspect of the more challenging nature of values in mental health and how phenomenology extends the re sources of analytically derived values-based practice in responding to them.

Second Case Study: Anna’s Story Anna is a young woman whose clinical picture satisfies DSM criteria for anorexia nervosa. She shows: a) significantly low body weight for her age due to “restriction of energy intake”; b) “Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat”; and c) “Disturbance in the way (she experiences her) body weight or shape, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of (her) current low body weight.” Anna also shows a number of associated features: her “self-esteem... (is) highly dependent on (her) perceptions of body weight and shape.” Also, “weight loss (is)... viewed (by Values and Values-based Practice her) as an impressive achievement and a sign of extraordinary self-discipline, whereas weight gain (was) perceived as an unacceptable failure of self-control.” Like many others she “lacks insight” into her condition and was brought to “pro fessional attention by family members.” Next to these symptoms, Anna says she has a troubled experience of her body from a first-person perspective: “I don’t feel my body. It changes in shape and consistency according to situations.” She com pares her body to a “wobbling liquid whose shape changes when I’m in the pres Once of other people.” She feels shame and disgust for her body. Yet, surprisingly she seeks identity through the others’ gaze that “makes me sense my body from without myself.” Also, she seeks a sense of herself through starvation aimed at sal Cation in thinness.

The Challenge of Values in Anna’s Story Anna’s story may seem at first glance diagnostically value-free. The “weight loss,” “e'er gy intake restriction,” and “intense fears” respectively of Criteria a) and b), although re queering judgments (e.g. significantly low body weight, intense fear of gaining weight), are in principle straightforwardly descriptive. Unlike Simon, furthermore, there are no fun tonal criteria of clinical significance required for a DSM diagnosis of anorexia. Function al consequences of anorexia are noted by DSM but are not diagnostic.

Closer inspection shows however that in addition to these descriptive features, values are integral not only to diagnosis in Anna’s story but also, as we will see, to treatment. As to diagnosis, the descriptive elements of Criterion a) (such as weight loss) are not in them selves diagnostic since they are features equally of non-pathological states of fasting (as in hunger strikers). Nor is intense fear of weight gain (Criterion b)) as such diagnostic: such (p. 358) fears may be normal in some groups (such as fashion models) and, anyway, according to DSM, they are not always present in anorexia. Something more than or additional to these descriptive criteria is thus needed to differentiate anorexia as a mental disorder from non-pathological fasting.

In Simon’s story the equivalent “something more,” required to mark out pathological delusional experiences from non-pathological counterparts such as spiritual experiences, was provided by the evaluative diagnostic elements in DSM’s Criterion b). In Anna’s story the relevant evaluative elements are to be found in DSM’s Criterion c) for anorexia. With the relevant evaluative elements italicized, Criterion c) reads “ disturbance in the way (she experiences her) body weight or shape, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of (her) current low body weight.”

The evaluative elements of Criterion c) for anorexia, like their counterparts in Criterion b) for schizophrenia, are explicit and as such accessible to the balancing processes of val ues-based practice. Again, the required balancing may seem straightforward in Anna’s case. Anna will of course balance the requisite values very differently from her family and Values and Values-based Practice the medical professionals involved. This is of the essence of her story. But from everyone else’s perspective it seems straightforwardly the case that in terms of the values ex pressed in Criterion c), that the way Anna experiences her body weight or shape is not just different but disturbed; that her perceived body weight or shape is not merely influx Incing but having an undue influence on her self-evaluation; and that while she recon Sizes that her body weight is low she does indeed show a persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of her condition. Anna then unlike Simon is ill and, correspondingly, in need of medical treatment. It is with treatment, however, that phenomenology comes into play.

Responding to the Challenge: A Phenomena # logical Depth Dimension The phenomenological tradition offers a rich resource of work on values. We return to this resource in the next section. Of particular relevance to Anna’s story however is Sartre’s phenomenology of the body. As developed in Being and Nothingness, Sartre’s phenomenology of the body gives a depth dimension to our understanding of the values in Anna’s story providing both a deeper understanding and approach to treatment.

The insight comes from Sartre’s conceptualization of the “lived body for others.” Phenom Oenology distinguishes two dimensions of corporeality, the body-subject and body-object. The body-subject is the body experienced from within, my own direct experience of my body, my direct awareness of myself as a spatiotemporal embodied agent in the world. The body-subject is thus a first-person perspective. The body-object by contrast is a thirdperson perspective. The body-object is the body thematically investigated from without, as by natural sciences such as anatomy and physiology, for example. In his phenomenolo gy of the body Sartre added a third dimension of corporeality that he called the “livedbody-for-others.” This third dimension of corporeality reflects the apprehension of one’s own body from the vantage point of someone else. It is a reflection of one’s own body as looked (p. 359) at by another person. When I become aware that someone is looking at me, I realize that my body can be an object for that other person. “With the appearance of the Other’s look,” writes Sartre (1986 ), “I experience the revelation of my being-as-ob Sect.” The upshot of this is a feeling of “having my being outside... [the feeling] of being an object.” Thus, one’s identity becomes reified by the gaze of the Other and reduced to the external appearance of one’s own body.

Sartre’s lived-body-for-others gives a precise way of characterizing Anna’s experience. Anna’s presenting concerns are about fasting aimed at reducing her body size. But be hind these presenting concerns, as one of us has reported in detail elsewhere, is Anna’s awareness of her own body. Anna experiences her body first and foremost as an object being looked at by another (as Sartre’s lived-body-for-oth ers) rather than from a first-person perspective (as a body-subject). Since she cannot have an experience of her body from within, she apprehends her body from without through the gaze of the Other. Her body is to her as she described it a “wobbling liquid”

Values and Values-based Practice that may change when she is in the presence of other people. Her body, so to say, takes the shape that the Others’ gaze imposes upon it. This is the source of her exaggerated concern to take responsibility for the way she appears to others. The Others’ gaze makes her feel shame or disgust for her body. Lacking a stable first-person experience as a bodysubject she seeks identity through starvation aimed at salvation in thinness.

In Anna’s case therefore (and by extension in other similar cases, see next section), the negative values defining her presenting problems (starvation aimed at thinness) are un derpinned by and reflect a deeper underlying set of values concerned with her negative experience of her lived body as a lived-body-for-others. In terms of DSM’s Criterion c), the “ disturbance in the way (Anna experiences her) body weight or shape,” the “ undue influence of body weight or shape on (Anna’s) self-evaluation,” and Anna’s “persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of (her) current low body weight,” all stem from this core psychopathological change in body image. This is the insight on Anna’s values (fast ing, thinness, and shaping up, importance of the way she appears to others) suggested by Sartre’s phenomenology of the body. But given this insight it is small wonder that when it comes to treatment, tackling Anna’s presenting symptoms head-on will prove ineffective. Treatment may of course involve a range of measures including, where appropriate, med cal interventions. But so far as the presenting problems in her behavior (fasting) and her motivating values (thinness and shaping up) are concerned any chance of effective inter Mention depends on therapy engaging with the underlying disturbances in the way she ex periences her body.

Again, we do not have space here to follow through in detail the implications for therapy of this Sartrean way of understanding anorexia. But one way of achieving such engage Bent is with a phenomenologically informed therapeutic values-based interview. This approach starts from a recognition that the values by which the presenting symptoms of people like Anna are (in part) defined (values of fasting and thinness) are driven by a deeper set of values concerned with their disturbed lived-body-for-others. There will thus be no way of convincing them that their values of thinness and fasting are wrong, since, given the reality (for them) of their need to expert Once their own body as an object being looked at by others, they are right. Instead of tackling their presenting symptoms head-on therefore the aim of therapy is to help them make sense of their drive for thinness and starvation by putting them in touch with the core psychopathological anomaly from which these stem —namely, their difficulties in feel ing their own body in the first-person (p. 360) perspective and in sustaining a stable and continuous sense of themselves as embodied agents.

The psychopathological core of the life-world of persons like Anna is not feeling oneself in the first-person perspective, and in particular feeling extraneous from one’s body and emotions. This entails a fleeting feeling of selfhood and an evanescent sense of identity. This vulnerable awareness of oneself is disturbing and generates the need to appraise oneself in alternative ways. One of the coping strategies or alternative means of selfrecognition in these persons is feeling their body through the gaze of Others. Obviously, this coping strategy is not voluntarily adopted. A second way to regain a sense of them Values and Values-based Practice selves is identifying oneself through one’s passion for thinness as passions representing a rupture in the fleeting character of their emotional and bodily life. The ossification of this passion and of the related value is the expression of the need to compensate for the dis Curbing, shameful, and anxiogenic fleeting sense of selfhood and identity.

If we want to understand what it is like to live with anorexia and bulimia it’s a mistake to see Anna’s values as merely imperfect cognition or as a kind of irrational or delusional be lief about one’s body or nutrition. Anna’s values are a kind of religion that goes beyond the rationality/irrationality divide. It is about the worth of life and the way to make one’s life meaningful. Food has a moral value: it is a sin and a temptation. Fatness has a moral value too as indicative of laziness, lack of self-care, and self-control. Thinness is more valuable than anything else including health. Strict rules are needed not to do wrong and to be led astray. Starvation is the unique salvation practice.

The values-based therapeutic interview thus aims to put people like Anna in touch with their underlying values as a step toward developing more effective and less destructive coping strategies. The depth dimension of understanding added by phenomenology to val ues-based practice is thus essential to meeting the values challenges presented by Anna’s story. Sartre’s phenomenology of the body explains the origins of the values driving Anna’s presenting anorexic symptoms and behaviors. This in turn informs treatment. Phe nomenology however does not thereby remove the need for analytically derived valuesbased practice. To the contrary it shows the need at least in cases like Anna’s for a double engagement with it. Values-based practice is required for engagement first with the val ues challenges of her presenting symptoms. In this respect the engagement is similar to that required with Simon. But with Anna values-based practice is also required for en gagement with the further values challenges arising from the origins of her presenting symptoms in underlying areas of psychopathology. What is required then in mental health, at least in cases of the kind exemplified by Anna’s story, is a combined valuesbased practice drawing equally on the process elements of analytically derived valuesbased practice and the depth dimension of understanding provided by phenomenology. In the next section we look at the extent to which this combined values-based practice may be generalized to other areas of psychopathology.

Generalizing from our Case Studies To a first level of generalization we have noted already the clinical and empirical evi Fence showing that the values evident in Simon’s story are, as we put it, but the tip of an evaluative (p. 361) iceberg. There are similar indications in Anna’s case. Pro-Ana websites (as they are called) provide ample evidence of the extent to which people with anorexia may share Anna’s values. Empirical studies of anorexia furthermore point to underlying body image disturbances consistent with the above Sartrean analysis of Anna’s expert Fences. Further evidence of such disturbances has been provided by a questionnaire developed by one of us called IDEA (IDentity and EAting disorders). Used with large samples both of patients and of the gen Values and Values-based Practice real population the IDEA questionnaire has shown that people affected by or prone to feeding and eating disorders tend to have a reduced first-person apprehension of their body, experiencing it rather through the gaze of the Other.

In this final section we indicate the further scope for generalization from our case studies afforded by the rich resources available respectively from phenomenological psy chopathology and from the phenomenology of values.

Phenomenological Psychopathology The long tradition of phenomenological studies of schizophrenia has particular potential as the basis for future work in this area. Descriptions of what are in effect values in per sons with schizophrenia can be found in Kretschmer, Berle and Gruhle, Minkowski, Binswanger, and Blankenburg. The experiences of a person with schizophrenia are said to reflect a “crisis in common sense” resulting in “antagonomia” (literally, striving against rules) and “idionomia” (a belief in the radical uniqueness and exceptionality of one’s own as against other people’s view of how things are). Such accounts are presented descriptively. Yet their impact on the life of the person concerned depends on their evaluative content. An tagonomia, for example, reflects the evaluative element in a form of more basic socialize son abnormality characteristic of schizophrenia called “heteronomic vulnerability”.

So understood, antagonomia (the value shaping the schizophrenic persons’ world-view and driving their actions), distancing oneself from others, instead of being a merely de scriptively defined symptom of a mental disorder, becomes understandable as a natural consequence of one’s feeling vulnerable to the destructive “force” emanating from the Other (“heteronomic vulnerability”), jeopardizing one’s own self-integrity and bodily boundaries. Also, antagonomia is seen as a way to preserve (the value of) one’s own ex ceptionality (“idionomia”) driving (as the corresponding action) the need to take an ec centric stand in the face of commonly shared assumptions and the here and now of the Other.

In being presented descriptively such accounts of the phenomenological psychopathology of schizophrenia mirror the failure to recognize values for what they are in empirically derived diagnostic criteria (such as those of DSM). There is a similar failure of recogni son in Sartre’s phenomenology of the body. Notwithstanding the ethical roots of existed tialism, Sartre positioned his phenomenology of the body essentially as an ontological rather than ethical study. This is why generalizing from our two case studies to other ar eas of psychopathology requires, in addition to the depth dimension of understanding available from phenomenological psychopathology, the insights also of analytic philoso phy of values. In (p. 362) Simon’s case it was analytic philosophy of values that provided the key insight into the nature of psychiatric diagnostic values as a reflection of the diver City of human values rather than of some (supposed) deficiency in psychiatric science. It Values and Values-based Practice was from this key insight that practical ways of working with such diversity in the form of values-based practice were derived. Anna’s case, similarly, illuminated as it was by the depth dimension of understanding provided by the phenomenology of the body, far from eliminating the need for analytically derived values-based practice, required, as we put it, a double engagement with it. It is to the further resources for this double engagement available from the phenomenology of values that we turn next.

The Phenomenology of Values Again, we do not have space here to cover the phenomenology of values in detail but will focus instead on its potential contribution to the combined phenomenological/analytic, values-based practice needed to meet the particular challenges of values in mental health. To anticipate, analytically derived values-based practice in the form summarized above is cast mainly in cognitive terms. This, as we have seen, is important heuristically. It is also important practically in the relative perspicuity of the process elements derived from it (summarized in Figure 40.1). The phenomenology of values adds to the cognitive aspects of values by which analytic values-based practice is constituted corresponding af fictive and conative aspects. These aspects of values are represented also in analytic moral philosophy: emotivist theories, for example, make central the Effective aspects of values; and Austin, among others, worked on the nature of agency (Austin 1956–1957 ). But phenomenological value theory is distinctive in offering a holistic approach, an approach that connects the cognitive, Effective, and conative aspects of val ues one with another and with other aspects of the life-world of the individual concerned including their identity.

The theories in question were not developed with the challenges of psychopathology in mind. But their potential in this respect is well-illustrated by the work of three classical figures in phenomenology, Edmund Husserl, Max Schemer, and Paul Ricouer. Husserl’s value theory makes the phenomenological three-way understanding of values explicit by setting his value theory within his wider account of mental phenomena as com rising cognitive, Effective, and conative elements. Husserl argued that although what is valued is framed cognitively (it is perceived, remembered, imagined, etc.), actually at taking value (valuing something as good, or bad, or with indifference) always involves affect. Thus, the act of valuing in an Effective act that is related to the cognitive apple Pension of an object, that is, the very same object is apprehended cognitively (e.g. per ceptually) and Effectively (i.e. emotionally intuited). It is the latter that leads to conative or volitional (i.e. choosing) mental processes.

Schemer takes us further toward a holistic understanding of values by linking values with persons. Along with most other phenomenologists, Schemer took the affect Dive faculty to be essential at least for moral values. But people, Schemer recognized, exp rience themselves simultaneously at different levels, caught “in between” the possibilities of good and evil, of spirit and flesh, of animal life and the divine. Our values, Schemer ar Cued, are thus necessarily “stratified”: there are values of the Holy and Unholy (the Di Values and Values-based Practice vine), psychic values (p. 363) (the Beautiful and the Ugly, Right and Wrong, Truth and Falsehood), vital values (Noble and Vulgar), sensual values (the Agreeable and Disagree able), and values of utility (Economics, Government). Schemer’s account of shame and re penance illustrates the “in-between” in action. The basic condition for feeling shame, he argued, is an imbalance between the claims of spiritual personhood and embodied needs. In shame what Schemer characterizes as “spirit” and “flesh,” eternity and time, essence and existence, come together in tension. To be a human being is pre Wisely to experience simultaneously these two orders of being such that one is unable to sever either without losing one’s very humanity. Yet it is in this tension too that the poss Ability of repentance arises. To be a person means to be able to acknowledge and copse quently extinguish in repenting one’s having-been-bad while simultaneously becoming good. Schemer’s account of repentance thus highlights in a way that goes beyond the re sources of a merely cognitive values-based practice the dynamic and temporal nature of personhood and its links with personal values.

Like Schemer, Ricouer shows, in this case through his concept of motivations, how values come into conflict one with another. Ricouer goes further however in giving us an account of how we resolve value conflicts through the exercise of feelings and imagine son.

Values, Ricouer argued, are based on motivations, ranging from bodily motivations to mo tivations of pure reason. Bodily motivations are involuntary and bound to our basic needs such as thirst and hunger. Rational motivations are voluntary and include the capacity to transcend our bodily needs. Feelings, understood as spontaneous beliefs about what is good or bad, highlight motives and it is the relative strengths of our feelings that pro Educes actions. For instance, I decide not to follow the bodily motive of hunger where this is outweighed by the rational motive of shaping up. Imagination in Ricouer’s phenomenal ogy is what enables a person to break with the immediate satisfaction of a bodily motive. It is through imaginative comparison that we are able to compare one motive with anoth er and to balance their respective satisfactions. The way we balance motivations over a period of time amounts to what Ricouer called a “quest for legitimacy” through which we establish our unique identity.

Conclusion An indication of the potential of phenomenological value theory for a combined valuesbased practice is the extent to which each of the theories just outlined illuminates one or another component of the process of analytically-derived values-based practices. An im portent point of congruence, for example, in Husserl’s phenomenology, is between his comparative affects (affects that value something as better or worse than something else) and the outputs of analytic values-based practice in balanced decision-making between values. The importance of tensions between “stratified values” in Schemer’s theory is con grunt similarly with (and in this respect gives substance to) the complex and conflicting values with which the process of values-based practice is concerned. Ricouer’s theory has Values and Values-based Practice much to say that is relevant to the outcomes and process of values-based practice but in addition speaks to its premise of mutual respect. In analytic values-based practice this premise is derived semantically (i.e. from the meanings of value terms; Fulford 2014). But mutual respect is a consequence also of Ricouer’s quest for legitimacy. For the quest is mutual, it is a quest for the recognition of our values by others. Our own values, there fore, to the extent that they (p. 364) embody our identity as unique individuals, are rooted in and depend critically on the mutual respect of others.

As we have indicated the connections between the phenomenology of values and valuesbased practice remain potential. Our point for now is that there is no barrier of principle to such connections being made. The complementarities just outlined suggest that, in the context at least of phenomenological psychopathology, making such connections would be both heuristically productive and practically rewarding.

Acknowledgments Simon’s story is based on one of a number of cases collected by Mike Jackson as part of his doctoral work and published in Jackson M. and Fulford K. W. M. “Spiritual Ex perience and Psychopathology.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 4: 41–66.

(p. 365) Fulford K. W. M.. “Living with Uncertainty: a First-Person-Plural Response to Eleven Commentaries on Values-based Practice.” In M. Loughlin (ed.), Debates in Val ues-based Practice: Arguments For and Against, chapter 13. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni varsity Press.

Fulford K. W. M., Smirnov A. Y. U., and Snow E.. “Concepts of Disease and the Abuse of Psychiatry in the USSR.” British Journal of Psychiatry 162: 801–810.

Fulford K. W. M., Pale E., and Carroll, H.. Essential Values-based Practice: Clinical Stories Linking Science with People. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Fulford K. W. M., Bortolotti L., and Brooke M.. “Taking the Long View: An Emery ing Framework for Transnational Psychiatric Science.” Special Article for World Psychic try 13: 108–117.

Fulford K. W. M., Dewey S., and King M.. “Values-based Involuntary Seclusion and Treatment: Value Pluralism and the UK’s Mental Health Act 2007.” In J. Z. Saddler, W. van Stamen, and K. W. M. Fulford (eating disorders.), The Oxford Handbook of Psychiatric Ethics, chapter 60, pp. 839–860. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Fulford K. W. M., Crepaz-Kay D., and Stanghellini G. (forthcoming). “Depressions Plural: Pathology and the Challenge of Values.” In C. Foster and J. Herring (eating disorders.), Depression and the Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Panda I. A., Fulford-Smith L., Barber Z. E., Hobbs T. D., Fulford K. W. M., and Pale E.. “The Importance of Seeing Things from Someone Else’s Point of View.” BMJ Ca Values and Values-based Practice Beers onlinejournal. The_importance_of_seeing_things_from_someone_else's_point_of_view Hare R. M.. The Language of Morals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hope T., Tan J., Stewart A., and Fitzpatrick R.. “Anorexia Nervosa and the Lan gauge of Authenticity.” Hastings Center Report 41: 19–29.

Husserl E.. Vorlesungen Weber Ethic und Wertlehere. In Husserliana 28. Published in English Dordrecht, Boston (MA), London: Kluwer, LLIX-523.

Wendell R. E.. “The Concept of Disease and its Implications for Psychiatry.” British Journal of Psychiatry 127: 305–315.

Kretschmer E.. Korperbau und Character. Berlin: Stringer. Published in English. Physique and Character. New York, Brace & Company.

Loughlin M. (ed.). Debates in Values-based Practice: Arguments For and Against. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Minkowski E.. La Schizophrenia. Psychopatologie des schizoids et des Schizo phrenes. Paris: Payout.

Ricouer P.. Le volontaire et l’involontaire. Paris: Rubier. Published in English. Freedom and Nature. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Saddler J. Z.. Values and Psychiatric Diagnosis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sartre J. P.. Being and Nothingness, trans. H. E. Barnes. London: Rutledge.

Schemer M.. Der Formalism's in der Ethic und die material Wertethik: Ne'er Ver such der Grundlegung Dines ethischen Personalismus, Gesammelte Were, vol. 2. Bern, Munich: France, 1954. Published in English. Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values: A New Attempt Toward a Foundation of An Ethical Personalism, trans. M. S. Rings and R. L. Funk. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Stanghellini G.. Lost in Dialogue. Anthropology, Psychopathology, and Care. Ox ford, Oxford University Press.

Stanghellini G. and Ballerina M.. “Values in Persons with Schizophrenia.” Schizo phrenia Bulletin 33: 131–141.

(p. 366) Stanghellini G., Castellini G., Brogan P., Faravelli C., and Wicca fifth.. “Identity and Eating Disorders (IDEA): A Questionnaire Evaluating Identity and Embodiment in Eating Disorder Patients.” Psychopathology 45: 147–158.

Stanghellini G., Trisolini F., Castellini G., Ambrosini A., Faravelli C., and Wicca fifth.. “Is Feeling Extraneous from One’s Own Body a Core Vulnerability Feature in Eating Dis orders?” Psychopathology 48: 18–24.

Values and Values-based Practice Stanghellini G. and Mancini M.. The Therapeutic Interview. Emotions, Values and the Life-world. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Stevenson C. L.. “The Emotive Meaning of Value Terms.” Mind 46: 14–31.

Szasz T. S.. “The Myth of Mental Illness.” American Psychologist 15n: 113–118.

Tan J. O. A., Hope T., Stewart A., and Fitzpatrick R.. “Competence to Make Treat Bent Decisions in Anorexia Nervosa: Thinking Processes and Values.” Philosophy, Psych try, & Psychology 13: 267–282.

Wing J. K., Cooper J. E, and Sartorius N.. Present State Examination (PSE). Mea surement and Classification of Psychiatric Symptoms; An Instruction for PSE and CAT EGO Program. London: Cambridge University Press.

K.W.M. Fulford KWM (Bill) Fulford, Fellow of St Catherine’s College and Member of the Philosophy Faculty, University of Oxford, Emeritus Professor of Philosophy and Mental Health, University of Warwick, and Founder Editor, Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology; for mealy Special Advisor for Values-based Practice and member of the Mental Health Bill team, Department of Health, UK Giovanni Stanghellini Department of Psychological, Humanistic and Territorial Sciences, Universityà G.

d’Annunzio’

Embodiment

Embodiment Eric Matthews The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, History of Western Philosophy (Post-Classical) Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords The primary aim of this article is to explain the concept of human beings as embodied subjects, which has been proposed as a better alternative view of mind–brain relations than the main traditional views, Cartesian dualism and mechanistic materialism. Whereas the traditional views see “mind” as the name of a substance, the “embodiment” view treats human beings as unities, whose mental activities are influenced by bodily function ing, and vice versa. The concept was developed mainly by some philosophers in the phe nomenological tradition, most notably by Maurice Merleau-Monty. The article ends with some examples of clinical applications of the concept in relation to the treatment of three types of mental disorder.

Keywords: embodied subjects, mind–brain relations, dualism, materialism, human beings as unities, Merleau-Pon ty # The Embodied Subject TO understand the concept of embodiment (or the embodied subject), as it has figured in recent discussions among philosophers, psychiatrists, neuroscientists, and cognitive sci Dentists, it is important to see it in the context of the perennial debate about the nature of mental life (including mental disorder). In the last few centuries, it has been widely as Fumed that our choice on this question is limited to only two positions, which are seen as diametrically opposed: namely, “substantial dualism” and “materialism.” The concept of human beings as embodied subjects has been proposed as a third option, which escapes the perceived shortcomings of both dualism and materialism. We can therefore under stand this third option better by first briefly outlining each of the traditional views, and the problems in them which the concept of embodiment seeks to resolve.

The most fully elaborated form of dualism was developed by the French philosopher, René Descartes, and hence is often called “Cartesian dualism.” Descartes argued Embodiment that the human mind must be regarded as something quite different in character from anything physical (including the human brain). The mind, for him, was a “thinking thing,” without physical properties: it was invisible, intangible, and occupied no space, and so was not subject to physical laws. As he expressed it, it was an “immaterial substance.” By calling it a “substance,” he meant that it was capable of existing independently—in partic Alar, its existence was independent of that of anything physical, including even the human body. The body, including the brain, was a part of “material substance,” that is, of the physical world. As such, like all other physical objects, it was visible and tangible, it occur pied space, and functioned in accordance with the laws of physics (which, for Descartes, essentially meant mechanics). Although the mind had, strictly speaking, no location, it was thought of as metaphorically “inside” the human being, the site of her “inner life,” in the sense that it was accessible only to the person whose mind it was, by “introspection.” The body, on the other hand, was accessible, like all other physical objects, to anyone equipped with the relevant senses. A human being, in short, was a compound of two quite distinct parts—hence the view’s designation as “dualism.”

(p. 368) Even in Descartes’s own time, a number of thinkers saw problems in dualism. Most obviously, there was the question of how “mind” and “body” could interact. Such in teractions are a familiar part of everyday life, and the growth of greater scientific knoll edge of the brain has revealed more of them: for instance, some kinds of brain damage have been seen to lead to loss of memory, and even personality change. In psychiatry, in particular, we need to account for the obvious role which brain dysfunctions seem to play in various forms of mental disorder. The duelist conception of “mind” and “body” as dis tint “substances,” each operating according to different laws, has been seen as making it impossible to account for such interactions between them, and so has been rejected by many as unscientific.

Most of those who reject dualism on these grounds have concluded that we must accept instead that the mind is not a separate substance from anything physical, but is part of the material world. In particular, they have identified what we customarily call “mind ” with the brain. This is understandable, since the brain is the part of the material world which is most centrally concerned with our “mental” functioning—with thoughts, emo sons, desires, moods, and so on. “Materialism” thus usually means the identification of “mind” with “brain,” or (perhaps better) the identification of thoughts, emotions, desires, moods, and other elements in our mental life with processes going on in the brain, or states of the brain. It is then assumed that our thoughts, emotions, etc. can be fully ex pained as caused by other brain processes and states. This appears to avoid the duelist problem of accounting for “mind–brain interaction,” since mind and brain are one and the same.

Phenomenology and Embodiment There are problems in both dualism and materialism. One central problem with dualism is that it situates our “minds” outside the world that we think about. Our relation to the Embodiment things and people around us, and even to our own bodies, thus becomes that of a de ached observer, rather than of someone who participates in, or experiences, the world. Materialists do not have that problem: but their identification of our minds with our brains, seen as one kind of mechanical system, makes us just one kind of object in the world. As such, we are causally (that is, passively) affected by other objects, but do not actively engage with the world in the way required for genuine experience.

The problems in both views can be seen as a consequence of the assumption, typical of most traditional Western philosophy, that our primary relation to the world was cognitive —that of ourselves, as knowers (“knowing subjects”), to a reality which is “objective,” in the sense that it is as it is independently of how we “subjectively” experience it. Then the task of both philosophy and science is to strive for objective knowledge in that sense. De velopments in philosophy in the twentieth century led to a questioning of this assumption. The work of the later Wittgenstein was one of these developments: but more important from the present perspective were elements in the “phenomenological” tradition initiated by Edmund Husserl. The formulation of the concept of human beings as em bodied subjects, however, is mainly due to the work of certain critics, within the phenom ecological tradition, of aspects of Husserl’s original presentation of his philosophy. Most notable among these critics were Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, and, above all, Maurice Merleau-Monty.

(p. 369) At the heart of phenomenology, as these critics saw it, is the insight that any ac count that we can give of the world, ourselves, and our relation to the world, must Multi Lately get its meaning for us from our own experience of living in the world. The idea of an “objective” account of the world, in the sense of one totally independent of how we ex perience things, must thus be devoid of content. Without human experience, Merleau- Monty argues, “scientific symbols would be meaningless” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: xxii). The oretical science cannot give us the most fundamental account of reality, since it is itself dependent on our pre-theoretical encounters with things and people. Phenomenology aims to “rediscover this naïve contact with the world” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: lxx). It at tempts to give an account of ourselves and our world which is not intended to explain them theoretically, but simply to describe our experience of them as it is before we begin to theorize about it, in science or in more traditional philosophy. Such a description should clarify what it is that we are seeking to explain by our scientific theories.

To understand ourselves and our world thus requires us to start by reflecting on what it is like to be ourselves, living in the world in the ways we do. That is, we need to reflect on what Heidegger, Sartre, and Merleau-Monty all call our “being-in-the-world.” If we ap roach our being-in-the-world without assumptions, we can see that it is primarily a mat ter of our practical and emotional engagement with things and people, rather than of the detached observation of pure cognition. We move about the world, have purposes related to our situation, use objects to realize these purposes, feel emotions about things and people, and see things and people as meaningful in relation to these purposes and emo sons. For example, a hammer has the meaning of a “tool,” and our native place has the meaning of “home.” Detached cognition enters in, and has value for us, only in its relation Embodiment to this practical and emotional engagement. As Merleau-Monty expresses it, our con sciousness is primarily not a matter of theoretical thinking about things, but of practical dealings with them—what Merleau-Monty actually says is “Consciousness is originarily not an ‘I think that’, but rather an ‘I can’ ” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: 139).

If we are in the world in this active and engaged way, then we are neither, as in dualism, a mind, loosely attached to a body, nor, as in materialism, a purely physical object (a body, and especially a brain) which is passively affected by other objects. Rather, each of us is a living human being, who is both a “subject” and an “object,” and whose “subjective,” or mental, life is inseparably connected with her “objective,” or bodily, life: in short, we are embodied subjects. Our thoughts and feelings about the world, and our desires in relation to it, are not purely “inner events”: what thought or feeling we are having can be deter mined only by its role in our dealings with the world. This rules out both the Cartesian identification of thoughts, etc. with events in the soul, and the materialist identification of them with events in the brain. Indeed, as the contemporary German philosopher and psy chiatrist, Thomas Fuchs, argues, materialism in this respect contains relics of dualism. Thoughts, etc., Fuchs says, are “life-performances,” which can be attributed only to a “be ing of flesh and blood and only in connection with his life-situation” ( Fuchs 2008: 354, translation by E. M.).

Conversely, a person’s body is not just one kind of object for her, like the chair she sits on, or the cars that she sees passing on the road. Her principal experience of her body is, as Merleau-Monty puts it, as “the vehicle of being-in-the-world” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: 84). Her body provides her individual perspective on the world, the here and now from which she necessarily experiences things. Sartre makes the important point that my body exists, not only for me, but also for others. I am aware of the Other primarily as an object in my (p. 370) world, but a special kind of object, who also views me as an object in his or her world. As Sartre says, “I never apprehend the Other as body without at the same time in a non-explicit manner apprehending my own body as the center of reference indicated by the other” ( Sartre 1969: 344). Thus, living one’s own body is also necessarily living in an intersubjective world—a world in which our relations with others, in society and culture, are part of what we are ourselves.

For some purposes, of course, we can regard even our own bodies as one kind of physical object. For instance, a medical student might take her own body as a mere instance when studying how the human body generally functions. This would be different from the way in which she experiences her body in acting in the world—for example, in using her hands in caring for patients. In some of his works, Husserl makes this distinction in terms of two German words for “body,” Köper and Lab (e.g. Husserl 1970: 107). By Köper (usually translated as “physical body”), he means the body considered as one more object in the world, to be described and explained in the same terms as any other physical object. By Lab (usually translated as “living body”), he means the body as experienced by someone as the vehicle of their life.

Embodiment

Being embodied in the way human beings are is being a member of a particular human society. Being aware of oneself as an individual subject, engaged in the world from a par titular point of view, is necessarily being aware too of other subjects with whom one can communicate, by verbal language and other means. An “I” is necessarily part of a “we.” The possibility of communication, whether in words or in other ways, depends on culture ally shared meanings. For example, what it means to say “I love you” will differ depend ing on the concept of love which exists in the speaker’s and hearer’s culture. In this way, the cultural context in which human beings live gives a particular coloring to the emo sons, desires, beliefs, purposes, etc. which they have. This is a further reason for not identifying our “mental” life with brain processes or brain-states.

To say that human beings are embodied subjects is to say, in summary, that their xis Fence—their actions, their thoughts, their feelings, and so on—is primarily as a kind of liv ing beings. It is rooted in their nature as a particular biological species, with needs, and with desires and thoughts relating to those needs. Like all complex animals, their deal Dings with their environment are active and purposeful, not a matter of mechanical re spouses to stimuli. But they differ from other species in that they are members of a par titular society, who communicate with other members through language and meaningful action. This gives a cultural context to their behavior, which they can and do develop by reflection. Merleau-Monty says, for this reason, that “Man is an historical idea, not a nat Aral species” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: 174). To understand human behavior, therefore, we must take account of this constant interplay between physiology, personal reflection, and cultural context.

Relevance of Embodiment to Psychiatry Embodiment has been described, in the Preface to a recent collection of articles, as “on the way to becoming a major paradigm of psychopathology”. It has been “on the way” for a considerable time. For instance, Heidegger’s account of the hu man mode of being as being-in-the-world was already an influence on the “existential analysis” developed (p. 371) by Ludwig Binswanger and on the “phenomenological psychiatry” of Eugene Minkowski. More recent ly, Merleau-Monty’s more extensive account of embodiment has influenced such psychic Wrists and philosophers as Sass, Stanghellini, and Fuchs. In the 1960s, the controversial psychiatrist R. D. Ling, influenced more by Sartre than by Merleau-Monty, gave a phenomenological ac count of the experience of schizophrenia as a kind of divorce between the self and its body, so that the self was experienced as a mere “onlooker,” with no direct participation in the world around him or her (see Ling 2010, especially chapter 4).

The appeal of the idea of embodiment in this context is that it is seen as providing a more coherent and richer account of mental disorder than dualism or materialism. From a dual ist perspective, a “mental” disorder can only mean a disturbance of the functioning of “mental substance.” Healthy mental functioning, for Descartes, is rational functioning, so Embodiment disorder must take the form of irrational thoughts, beliefs, feelings, desires, and so on. One of Descartes’s own examples is that of those “madmen” who are “so damaged by the persistent vapors of melancholia that they firmly maintain they are kings when they are paupers” ( Descartes 1984: 13). This wording seems to imply that Descartes believed that such delusions are the product of what we should call biochemical disturbances in the brain, causing the mind to deviate from rationality—as in such modern hypotheses as that of a dopamine imbalance in schizophrenia. But this would be inconsistent with dualism, which makes it impossible to account for such causal relations between the two sub stances. On the other hand, if a person arrived at such a delusion as a result of her own (presumably illogical) thinking, then that would be a matter for intellectual criticism, rather than therapy. It might be possible for Cartesian duelists to think of mental Visor Hers as having a “mental” cause if they thought of mental substance as including an “un conscious mind,” in which persisting psychological traumas were stored, causing Visor Hers in adult life. But, first, this would be inconsistent with Cartesian dualism: Descartes effectively defines mental substance as fully conscious. And secondly, it would still under estimate the role of brain dysfunction, and the corresponding value of physical treat Bents.

The opposing materialist identification of the mind with the brain, considered as a purely physical system, seems to imply that what we call “mental disorder” is really nothing but the distressing outcome of certain kinds of brain dysfunction. An example might be de precision, which is commonly seen as caused by such things as serotonin imbalances. This seems, however, to play down the importance of the particular kind of distress, some of which concerns bodily experience, which people with mental disorders suffer, as ex pressed in its relation to the patient’s own past experience and the distorted relations with other human beings which it produces. For the same reason, it does not give an ade Equate account of the valuable role played in treatment by “talking therapies.” Some mate realists might suggest that a talking therapy could cause changes in the nervous system, and so in the mental disorder. But this would be a misunderstanding of the implications of strict materialism. Talking therapies can work only if the patient understands the therapist’s words, and understanding is not a purely physical process. Strict materialism implies that the only genuine causal relationships are those in which a physical process leads to an equally physical change. On a strict materialist view, such talking therapies would seem to be no more relevant to, say, depression or obsessive-compulsive disorder than to epilepsy or motor neuron disease.

The opposing materialist identification of the mind with the brain, considered as a purely physical system, seems to imply that what we call “mental disorder” is really nothing but the distressing outcome of certain kinds of brain dysfunction. An example might be de precision, which is commonly seen as caused by such things as serotonin imbalances. This seems, however, to play down the importance of the particular kind of distress, some of which concerns bodily experience, which people with mental disorders suffer, as ex pressed in its relation to the patient’s own past experience and the distorted relations with other human beings which it produces. For the same reason, it does not give an ade Equate account of the valuable role played in treatment by “talking therapies.” Some mate realists might suggest that a talking therapy could cause changes in the nervous system, and so in the mental disorder. But this would be a misunderstanding of the implications of strict materialism. Talking therapies can work only if the patient understands the therapist’s words, and understanding is not a purely physical process. Strict materialism implies that the only genuine causal relationships are those in which a physical process leads to an equally physical change. On a strict materialist view, such talking therapies would seem to be no more relevant to, say, depression or obsessive-compulsive disorder than to epilepsy or motor neuron disease.

(p. 372) The concept of embodiment, by contrast, allows us to regard mental disorder as a disturbance, not merely of a part of a human being, but of the human being as a whole. This chimes better with the reality of such disorder, as experienced by sufferers. It can be seen as a disturbance of someone’s whole being-in-the-world, an unsatisfactory relation to other things and people, resulting from disturbing experiences, and the essential role in those experiences played by brain dysfunction, disorders of brain chemistry, etc. Both brain dysfunctions and traumatic experiences can thus be relevant (in different proper sons in different cases) to the explanation and treatment of the disorder.

Embodiment

To sum up, the concept of human beings as embodied subjects implies that we can under stand human mental life, including its disorders, only if we take into account both the brain processes which make it possible and the meaning which is given to our thoughts, emotions, etc. by our relation to the world, especially the “human world” of other people and society. This point can be illustrated by briefly considering three examples, in which writers with considerable clinical experience have used this concept as a framework for understanding some common mental disorders. First, Alas, in discussing pathological anxiety, argues that to understand it might require us to see it both as “rooted in a dysbal Once of a physiological equilibrium” and as “the expression of a frustrated urge for self-re alization” (Alas 2003: 222). Both, including their interaction with each other, would need to be taken into account in order to understand this as a problem in the person’s being-inthe-world. Secondly, Gillette considers the phenomenon of anorexia in young women. A full understanding of this phenomenon as a human experience, he suggests, may have to in Elude possible disturbances in brain functioning, causing a malfunction suppressing the desire to eat. But this on its own would not explain everything about the disorder: for ex ample, the fact that the young women seem unable to see how desperately thin they are, or their horrified denial that they have in fact gained weight, or their tendency to engage in other self-harming behaviors (Gillette 2003: 150). Finally, Fuchs suggests that we might see schizophrenia as a “circular process,” in which neuropsychological and biochemical dysfunction both gives rise to, and is in turn affected by, psychosocial alienation (Fuchs 2009: 230). PAGE_BREAK Autonomy is a key notion in contemporary health care yet also a contentious one. The en try starts by examining various conceptions of autonomy, personal, moral (Kant), and sub stantive with a view to putting the ideas and ideals that shape them in dialogue with the phenomenological tradition. After a brief presentation of the relevant conceptual innova sons introduced by phenomenology, from Brentano and Husserl, and later, Jasper, the discussion turns to phenomenological trends in psychopathology and more broadly bioethics, in order to identify areas that help with the two guiding questions of this arch cle: whether a phenomenological conception of autonomy is possible and how such a con caption might apply to the theory and practice of psychopathology.

Keywords: personal autonomy, moral autonomy, substantive autonomy, Husserl, Brentano, Jasper, Kant, bioethics # Introduction AUTONOMY is a dominant notion in patient care because it expresses the value of re Aspect for the other person; to recognize someone’s autonomy is simply to treat them as someone, not as some thing. The way theories of autonomy articulate this basic value, fo using on individual choice and fostering an ideal of self-sufficiency, is deeply at odds with the phenomenological tradition. As we shall see, one of the aims of phenomenology is to correct the “individualistic drift” of modern philosophy and allow for a fresh concept 1 son of the relation of self to world and self to others. My task in this article is to examine how such revision can yield a phenomenological understanding of autonomy and how this can be used to modify established clinical practice.

As used in contemporary philosophy, “autonomy” is not a single concept. It stands for a family of concepts that includes agential freedom, will and volition, choice, deliberation, control, and action. What unites these concepts is a concern with individual choice: the self or “autos” in “autonomy.” This concern reflects a philosophical and also cultural idea that as mature, rational beings we should not be under tutelary guidance, rather we Autonomy should be let free to lead our own lives as we see fit and others ought to respect our 2 choice of life.

Varieties of Autonomy Within the broad family of autonomy, three conceptions stand out in the current discus ion: personal, moral, and substantive.

The most familiar is personal autonomy. A key reference remains Gerald Dworkin’s paper for the Hastings Center. The paper’s defense of personal autonomy serves two immediate (p. 375) aims: to respond to philosophical skepticism about free will and to show why it might be wrong to use techniques of manipulation that take the individual out of the deli ion process. Personal autonomy speaks to the idea that our choices should be free from external interference and that they should be ours. Dworkin encapsulates these ideas in the formula “autonomy equals authenticity + independence” ( Dworkin 1976: 26).

The originator of the moral conception is Emmanuel Kant. For Kant autonomy is a moral demand on individuals. Morality makes a distinctive claim on us: it enjoins us to do the 3 right thing just because it is the right thing to do. In recognizing the authority of moral ty, each individual places himself under the moral law, which legislates unconditionally for every rational being. Failure to be autonomous, or more correctly, to act autonomous ly, amounts to choosing ends without regard for the law.

Although substantive conceptions of autonomy vary a great deal, their common aspiration is good self-management. The typical autonomous agent exhibits a range of epistemic and motivational virtues. For example, she ensures that her ends fit her overall intentions or plans, her means are appropriate, that the likely consequences of the proposed action are taken into account, that any contradictory desires and distracting emotions are con 4 trolled. Because she exhibits these virtues, the agent’s claim that her way of managing her affairs be respected by others is plausible: she has the authority she has earned by conducting herself autonomously.

Problems can be raised for all three conceptions and, as we shall see, have been raised especially sharply by phenomenologists: fragile and highly dependent agents appear to be excluded by the substantive conception; the formal understanding of the good in the Kantian conception threatens to detach morality from everyday life; finally, the model of self-knowledge used in the personal conception assumes an unexamined mind–world epees 5 temic dualism. In some ways, addressing this last issue is a priority for phenomenology and sets the stage for how autonomy may be rethought within a phenomenological con text.

Personal autonomy contains a negative claim addressed to others, roughly “do not med dle in my affairs,” and a positive claim expressing the thought that one is in charge of one’s affairs, because they make authentic or, in the substantive models, fully thought through choices. What count as mine are mental items, desires, the beliefs that guide those desires, the plans we make on the basis of such beliefs and desires, and the emo Autonomy sons that support or scupper our plans. To adjudicate between these different mental items and decide which ones truly are our own, we need to know them. An autonomous agent must know her mind. On a widespread view, we know our mental states, by looking 6 inwards, by introspection. By contrast, we know things about the world by observing, ex perimenting, testing. So mind and world are known in radically different ways: only the latter can be the topic of scientific study. It seems then that if we want to study the mind scientifically, the best way is by ridding ourselves of the idea that there is anything “in ner” for us to observe, and adopting a reductivist materialist approach to explaining hu man behavior.

(p. 376) Phenomenology: The Historical Context Starting with Franz Brentano in the 1870s and explicitly formulated as a philosophical program of investigation by Edmund Husserl in the 1900s, phenomenology aims to counter both the reductivist and the introspective approaches for the study of mind out lined above. Brentano distinguishes between “genetic psychology”, the empirical study of psychology, which employs the methods of the natural sciences to dis cover causal explanations or correlations, and descriptive psychology or phenomenology. Descriptive psychology, especially as Husserl develops it, is a philosophical discipline that studies the essential characteristics and interrelations of all psychic phenomena. The pro cedure to elicit these essential characteristics is called “eidetic variation” and it is a high 7 ly structured process of abstraction from basic pre-reflective experiences. What matters for our present discussion is not the detail of the phenomenological method but its Bambi son. Phenomenology breaks new ground because it does not split the world into inner and outer, each requiring a different approach. The starting point of the investigation of all phenomena is recognition that at the basis of all propositions are conscious states, stretches of consciousness of a subject. The importance accorded to the first person per spective has given rise to two different senses of “phenomenology,” phenomenology as Husserl practices it, is not concerned with the qualitative character of conscious states, or “what is like...?” questions, rather it is concerned with “what is...?” questions and aspires to be a rigorous science. There is another sense of “phenomenology,” as we shall see shortly, that aims precisely to recover the qualitative aspects of experience. What matters for the moment is Husserl’s radical vision of a science that is not Deductively ma terialistic, but which is premised on a rethinking of the mind–world relation.

Where does this radical rethinking leave the aspiration to be autonomous and the claim that one’s individual autonomy be respected? Husserl was highly responsive to the filo sophical and cultural idea that we should not be under tutelary guidance, but he dissociative identity disorder not articulate a positive ideal of personal autonomy; he thinks rather that emancipation from external forces puts individual enquirers on the path to objectivity (Husserl 1970: 7–8). With respect to more narrowly moral matters, Husserl is sympathetic to Kant, because Kant’s ethics is directed by the idea of an objective good, the moral law, but also critical of the abstract conception of the good (Husserl 1988: 235). The concern to root goods to the world of individual strikings and emphasis of reasoning and willing well brings Autonomy Husserl’s ethics close to contemporary substantive conceptions of autonomy ( Husserl 1988: 145).

The conceptual shift toward substantive ideals of agency, which include good reasoning and sound willing, amounts, however, to a move away from the basic intuition that Hindi visual choice ought to be respected even if it falls short of the ideal. In the phenomena logical tradition, there are two interesting ways of grappling with this issue. One is to radicalize the idea of personal autonomy. Jean-Paul Sartre’s conception of freedom as a condition for radical self-creation illustrates this. Sartre conceptualizes individual life as a life of abandonment, without any objective markers to show to how it should be lived. In dividuals have to (p. 377) confront the fact of their freedom, which means that “moral choice is comparable to the construction of a work of art” ( Sartre 1946: 45). This very austere picture of individual choice resembles the personal conception of autonomy but it permits no connection to a basic shared value, that of respect for each other, from which personal autonomy still draws its normative force.

The conceptual shift toward substantive ideals of agency, which include good reasoning and sound willing, amounts, however, to a move away from the basic intuition that Hindi visual choice ought to be respected even if it falls short of the ideal. In the phenomena logical tradition, there are two interesting ways of grappling with this issue. One is to radicalize the idea of personal autonomy. Jean-Paul Sartre’s conception of freedom as a condition for radical self-creation illustrates this. Sartre conceptualizes individual life as a life of abandonment, without any objective markers to show to how it should be lived. In dividuals have to (p. 377) confront the fact of their freedom, which means that “moral choice is comparable to the construction of a work of art” ( Sartre 1946: 45). This very austere picture of individual choice resembles the personal conception of autonomy but it permits no connection to a basic shared value, that of respect for each other, from which personal autonomy still draws its normative force.

An alternative path is to change the conversation and this is what Karl Jasper does when he brings together phenomenology and psychopathology in his 1913 work, General Psychopathology. Departing from Husserlian orthodoxy, Jasper has a view of philosophy as a passionate, engaged activity that can deepen our understanding of history cal and cultural phenomena, by analyzing how individuals engage with and make sense of their social world. In his early work on psychopathology, but also in his later work on religion and politics, he champions a philosophy that seeks to encompass human life as a whole made of many mutually irreducible parts. These philosophical commitments result in a highly distinctive phenomenology of psychopathology: patient self-description, the ac count of what an experience is like, has a clear role in the classification of the psychic phenomena, and empathy has a role in understanding the patient’s experience. Subject Dive symptoms, Jasper writes, “can only become an inner reality for the observer by his participating in the other person’s experiences, not by any intellectual effort” ( Jasper 1968: 1313). So here we have an account of an intersubjective relation that re quires attending to the other person and thus expresses respect for the other person, but without issuing into a defense of autonomy, because its normative foundation is the recon nation of human dependence and fragility.

Autonomy

Autonomy and Phenomenological Psy # chopathology Given this complex philosophical inheritance, phenomenologists working in contemporary psychopathology and bioethics respond to demands of clinical practice, which includes a clinical discourse around autonomy, by identifying a set of priorities that cut across infra- 8 disciplinary boundaries: (a) the first-person perspective is essential to the phenomenological approach, so the experience of the patient should count (b) human beings are to be treated as wholes not as sets of symptoms and psycho logical processes; this often means an emphasis on embodiment.

(c) human beings, their decisions, capacities, and symptoms, are to be considered within their social and cultural context (p. 378) (d) the aim, or one of the aims, of the medical encounter should be to under stand what is going on, make sense of things without aiming at finality; sometimes empathy is key; generally, modesty, provisionality, and open-endedness are to be ac cepted, indeed valued The list is illustrative of the pluralistic landscape of current practice. The question now is how any of these priorities intersect with recognizable conceptions of autonomy.

In many cases, the overarching aim seems to be to encourage practitioners to be more autonomous, in the sense of emancipating themselves from diagnostic formulae and tools. For example, having identified shortcomings in current diagnostic tools for schizophrenia, which are both fragmented and too unwieldy, Mullen argues that reliance on these tools may encourage a loss of the capacity to listen properly and attend to the patient’s life and state of mind. Martin and Hicherson similarly identify problems with clinical assessments of patient competence when it comes to making decisions about treatment. The gold standard in clinical and le gal practice is the MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool, which consists of a short structured interview and a scoring system allowing the quantitative psychological assess Bent of the patient. By placing high value on individual cognitive performance of the pa taint, the tool ignores the decision context, the complex temporality experienced by the patient, and the lived experience of judgment by patient and assessor. And similar con Ferns about the way questionnaires fail to capture the experience of the patient and limit the communication are raised by Tombs (1992: 26–30). But these calls for the practition er to think for herself are aimed at fostering sensitivity to the particularity of each situ son.

Autonomy

Explicit attempts to think of patient autonomy within a phenomenological context tend to assume a substantive conception that comes close to ideas of human flourishing. The most explicit such model is developed in a series of articles by Thomas Fuchs, who argues for the importance both diagnostically and in terms of treatment of having an integrative conception of autonomy.

The question is to what extent is it useful to think of these approaches as phenomenology cal Preconceptions of autonomy? The basic value expressed by the concept of autonomy is respect for the other person, so invocation of autonomy can function as a reminder that one treats a who not a what. As we saw, commit Bent to the basic value of respect can take very different forms. Historically, autonomy in the clinical context is aimed at placing limits on paternalistic interference. The phenom nological priorities listed earlier have different set of targets, such as dependence on for mule for diagnosis and treatment, and top-down, piecemeal approaches to patient care. These phenomenological targets can be usefully seen as extensions of the idea of autono my and as contributions to thinking how a substantive conception in particular can have application in the clinical context.

More challenging for phenomenologists is the way the normative balance is tipped to ward being in charge of one’s own affairs. Autonomy in all three conceptions we dis cussed earlier states that one is or is helped to become in charge of one’s life, by control ling what is external or alien. This idea fits well the medical model of psychopathology. So we speak of mental illness, disorder, dysfunction, distress, and aim to cure or to alleviate what we diagnose as pathological. By contrast, the phenomenological injunction is to seek meaning in the (p. 379) experience. This is reflected clearly in the acceptance of provision laity and open-endedness in (d). Taking this idea of meaning in the experience a bit fur her we can look at notable examples in the phenomenological literature about the reveal Cory value of anxiety and insomnia as states that tell us something important about our 9 standing in the world. While such insight into our condition can be described as an at tainment, it is quite different from the achievement of rational self-constitution, which re mains the goal of personal, moral, and substantive conceptions of autonomy.

Acknowledgments Thanks to Lambert Wising and to the editors for their helpful comments. PAGE_BREAK Katrina Deligiorgi is Reader in Philosophy at the University of Sussex. She is the au Thor of The Scope of Autonomy: Kant and the Morality of Freedom; Kant and the Culture of Enlightenment; and editor of Hegel: New Directions and of the Hegel Bulletin.

Autonomy

Katrina Deligiorgi is Reader in Philosophy at the University of Sussex. She is the au Thor of The Scope of Autonomy: Kant and the Morality of Freedom; Kant and the Culture of Enlightenment; and editor of Hegel: New Directions and of the Hegel Bulletin.

Alterity

Alterity Søren Overgaard and Mads Gram Henriksen The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Alterity examines a key notion in phenomenology, viz. that of otherness or alterity, and distinguishes between a broad and a narrow definition of alterity. Broadly understood, “alterity” refers to anything that eludes or transcends a subject’s grasp. Narrowly under stood, it refers exclusively to another agent, subjectivity or mind, or what is experienced as such. The chapter outlines classical and contemporary phenomenological analyses of experiences of alterity in the narrow sense of the term. It considers analyses of normal experiences of alterity found in the philosophical literature—focusing in particular on Husserl, Merleau-Monty, Sartre, and Levinas—as well as analyses of pathological expert Fences of alterity described in phenomenological psychopathology, such as auditory verbal hallucinations. Finally, it suggests that “radical alterity” is a central feature of the phe nomenology of schizophrenia.

Keywords: alterity, otherness, schizophrenia, auditory verbal hallucinations, radical alterity, Husserl, Merleau- Monty, Sartre, Levinas # Introduction ALTERITY—OR otherness—is a key notion in phenomenology. In this chapter, we distin gush between a broad and a narrow definition of alterity. We then go on to outline class cal and contemporary phenomenological analyses of experiences of alterity in the narrow sense of the term. We consider analyses of normal experiences of alterity that are found in the philosophical literature as well as analyses of pathological experiences described in phenomenological psychopathology.

Broad and Narrow Definitions of Alterity Within phenomenology, one can distinguish between a broad and a narrow definition of the term “alterity.” According to the broad definition, there are “three fundamentally dif Alterity ferment types of alterity: alterity in the form of non-self (world), oneself as Other, and Other self” ( Zahavi 1999: 195). On this broad understanding, “alterity” refers to anything that eludes or transcends a subject’s grasp. Thus, inanimate objects and, more generally, the so-called “external” world transcend our grasp insofar as it is not possible to perceive all aspects of them at once. For example, we always see a cube from a partic Alar vantage point, which means that we never strictly speaking see more than three of its six sides. Yet, in some sense we are perceptually aware of the “unseen” sides as well, that is, we see the cube as having sides that are not currently seen, thus “transcending” our current experience of it (Husserl 2001: 40–41). Strange as it may sound, we also ran Ascend ourselves in various ways. For example, as embodied subjects we have external ap pearances that routinely escape us. Mirrors aside, we generally do not see our own face or back. Finally, as many philosophers have noted, other subjects (or minds) elude us in even more profound ways than we elude ourselves. For, in addition to whatever transcend Fence pertains to their bodies, the minds of others are in principle inaccessible to us, it might be said. While others’ bodies are as perceptible as inanimate objects are, it seems there simply is no such thing as perceiving another (p. 382) person’s mind or their mental states or episodes. This is the source of the philosophical problem of other minds.

Although, as we will see, phenomenologists have tended to question the assumption that another’s mentality is imperceptible, most classical and contemporary phenomenologists accept that other subjects or minds are radically transcendent in a way inanimate things are not. Husserl thus maintains that the other subject is “the only transcendence really worthy of the name” and that “everything else we call transcendence, such as the object Dive world, is based upon the transcendence of other subjectivities” ( Husserl 1959: 495; our translation, italics in original). Similarly, Levinas affirms that “[t]he absolutely other is the Other [ Autrui ]” (Levinas 1969: 39). Such remarks point to a narrow definition of “al Verity.” Narrowly defined, “alterity” refers exclusively to another agent, subjectivity or 1 mind, or what is experienced as such. The rationale behind restricting the use of the term “alterity” in this way is that only other subjects present an in-principle limitation to our knowledge or grasp, as we shall see in the next section. In the remainder of the essay, we will focus on the narrow sense of alterity.

Husserl and Merleau-Monty on Experiences of # Alterity In this section, we outline core parts of Husserl’s and Merleau-Monty’s broadly cover gent classical phenomenological analyses of the experience of alterity, and briefly com pare these with the proposals of Sartre and Levinas. Husserl’s and Merleau-Monty’s anally ses take their point of departure in the mentioned idea that, as subjects of experience and action, we experience ourselves as embodied. Briefly, the “transcendence” (or “alterity” in the broad sense) of material objects such as tables resides in the fact that such objects are always experienced as containing “more” than what is currently perceived. Seated at Alterity a table, one sees only the table top—partly occluded, perhaps, by books, coffee cups, etc. —and perhaps two legs of the table. At the same time, one is tacitly aware of the table as having an underside, of the table as having more legs than are currently in view, and of the table top as continuing uninterrupted beneath the occluding books and cups. Accord ing to Husserl and Merleau-Monty, one is aware of the hidden aspects of things as aspects that would come into view if one were to move in particular ways. This highlights the cru Dial role of the body ( Lab ), which anchors us in our world, enables it to appear experien sally, and is the seat of our power of locomotion. For Husserl and Merleau-Monty, there fore, only an embodied subject can experience “transcendent,” material objects ( Husserl 2001: 39–53; cf. Merleau-Monty 2012: 334).

According to Husserl and Merleau-Monty, we experience our own subjectivity as embed ied. Thus, the question is not how we can reach other minds “hidden behind” their bodies (see Merleau-Monty 1964: 52–53), but rather how their bodies can appear to us as (p. 383) bodies of the right sort, namely as other embodied subjects. Husserl’s guiding idea is that we must experience our own body and the body of another as forming a “pair,” appearing as two of a kind (Husserl 1995: 112). In brief, if a person touches a table top with her hand, this action is at the same time subjective and bodily; and if she watches her hand as it explores the table top, it visually appears to her as such. If she notices another person’s hand moving across the table top, she will immediately see it as a subjective organ ex poring the table top, just like her own hand.

Husserl and Merleau-Monty emphasize that although this experience is a perceptual exp rience of the other’s embodied subjectivity and not the result of an inference ( Husserl 1995: 111), this experience is importantly different from the perception of physical ob Sects such as tables and trees (Merleau-Monty 2012: 190–191). While the table never shows all of its sides at once, it nevertheless has no sides or aspects that cannot be per caved. Even the naked wood under the wood stain can be perceived, if we are willing to damage the surface. Other subjects, by contrast, have aspects that essentially are upper ceivable, Husserl thinks. We can see another’s joy in her smile, and we can to some de Cree appreciate what it is like for her to feel this joy. But the precise subjective “feel” of her joy as she experiences it is in principle beyond our perceptual grasp (Husserl 1995: 109; Merleau-Monty 2012: 372). More generally, although we may understand how the world looks from another’s perspective, we can never literally see things through another person’s eyes or undergo their experiences as they undergo them. Indeed, according to Husserl and Merleau-Monty, this must be so. As the former puts it, “if what belongs to the other’s own essence were directly accessible, it would be merely a moment of my own essence, and ultimately he himself and I myself would be the same” ( Husserl 1995: 109). In the words of Merleau-Monty, the other’s dimension of inaccessibility is the “price” we must pay for there to be others in the world at all (2012: 379).

Husserl and Merleau-Monty do not believe that we only experience alterity in concrete face-to-face encounters with others. Their point is not merely that our interactions with others may be—and perhaps increasingly are—mediated in various ways, for example, we send text messages, emails, and interact via social media. More important is the fact that Alterity we even experience the inanimate objects around us as testifying to the presence of oth ers. In cultural objects, for example, we experience “the near presence of others under a veil of anonymity. One uses the pipe for smoking, the spoon for eating” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: 363; cf. Heidegger 2007: 153–154). The very environments in which most of us live are infused with alterity in the shape of roads, fields, parks, and so on. However, inane mate objects are experienced as having a derived alterity (in the narrow sense) about them, in contrast to the intrinsic alterity of other people.

Although the Husserlian and Merleau-Pontiac perspectives on alterity are endorsed by many contemporary phenomenologists, they are not the only perspectives we find within the phenomenological tradition. Sartre’s analysis of alterity, for example, takes its point of departure in what he perceives as a weakness of the Husserlian account. For Husserl, as Sartre reads him, the paradigmatic encounter with another is a situation in which I observe and interpret another person. In other words, “ the Other is still an object for me ” (Sartre 1989: 255), that is, something I inspect with my gaze, much as I inspect oth er items in my environment. Sartre acknowledges that other people are very special ob Sects, according to Husserl, given that I am said to experience them as able to sense, feel, and think. But these abilities are ultimately properties that I attribute to a certain type of observed object. By contrast, Sartre claims that the paradigmatic encounter with another subject is the situation in which (p. 384) I experience myself as his or her observed object. Importantly, I can experience another’s presence as “the one who looks at me ” (Sartre 1989: 257) in situations in which I precisely do not see any others. Sartre offers the fa Nous example of a Peeping Tom observing some scene through a keyhole. When he takes himself to be alone, the voyeur is pure “looking”: fully absorbed by the scene, he is scarcely aware of himself or his actions. But the moment he hears (or believes he hears) footsteps in the corridor behind him, everything changes. Now he experiences himself as the shameful, contemptible voyeur exposed as such by the look of the unseen person be hind him (Sartre 1989: 259–260).

Levinas agrees with Sartre that it is problematic to think the paradigmatic experience of alterity is that of observing a special object. But Levinas is skeptical of Sartre’s positive account, since it seems merely to reverse the relation of observer and observed. For Lev ins, the exemplary experience of alterity does not consist in experiencing oneself to be an object or “theme attended to by the other, but rather in submitting oneself... to a morality” ( Levinas 1969: 86). In other words, we fundamentally experience others as creatures that have some sort of moral claim on us. Levinas realizes that our treatment of others may not always seem to bear this out. But he insists that some vague awareness of a moral demand or obligation is nevertheless part and parcel of normal experiences of others. The slight discomfort we feel—be it ever so slight—as we hurry past a beggar in the street testifies to this, Levinas thinks. After all, we experience nothing comparable 2 when we walk past a tree or a lamppost.

After this brief sketch of some classical phenomenological analyses of “normal” expert Fences of alterity, we will now consider some rather less normal ways in which alterity may show up in our experiences.

Alterity

Alterity and Psychopathology From the very outset, human beings are socially minded creatures. Yet, social relations are not always unproblematic. Even in normal conditions, relating to others can be diff cult and, as Sartre vividly has described, our interpersonal struggles may have high stakes, potentially drawing our freedom or self-understanding into question. Turning to psychopathology, we may observe various disturbed forms of relating to others, of per caving others, as well as, more broadly, disturbed experiences of the boundary between self and non-self. In the characterological traits and behavioral tendencies, which define personality disorders in ICD-10, certain deviating, largely persistent and in flexible patterns of relating to others form important diagnostic criteria. These include unwarranted Auspiciousness toward others (paranoid personality disorder) and callous unconcern for others (dissocial personality disorder). The involved personality disorders illustrate disturbed forms of relating to others but the involved perceptions of others are also not entirely unaffected. For example, the enduring, rigid perception of others as, in these cases, either basically threatening or worthless does not permit others to appear in their full transcendence and freedom. There exist, (p. 385) however, also more profound forms of “disturbed alterity” in psychopathological conditions. In the following, we ex lore some of these in the case of schizophrenia.

Setting aside psychotic experiences for now, many patients with schizophrenia report per Listing difficulties in relating to others. These difficulties are often present long before the onset of psychosis and may lead to social withdrawal and isolation. Social difficulties were addressed by many classical psychiatrists, especially un der the headings of (schizophrenic) “autism” (e.g. Minkowski 1927: 29–30; Bleuler 1950: 63–68; Binswanger 1987: 85) and lack of “common sense”, and they were considered essential features of the clinical picture of schizophrenia. In brief, autism and problems with common sense are considered indicative of a disturbance of the pre-reflective attunement with others and the world we share, for example, reflected in an inadequate grasp of the tacit rules of social interaction or by an inability to take for granted what others consider obvious.

Problems with common sense are often associated with excessive tendencies to hyper-re Elect (in an attempt to decode the meaning of everyday objects or social situations) and a fundamental, yet regularly ineffable feeling of being profoundly different from others ( An derssein ) or simply “wrong” ( Paras and Henriksen 2014: 253). The root of this unset ling feeling is often a persisting experience of being ontologically different from others (Paras and Henriksen 2014: 253) or, as Saks puts it, “not really human” ( Saks 2007: 193). In their ontological solitude, patients may, for example, perceive others as deeply enigmatic, as imbeciles concerned primarily with superficial (material) aspects of xis Fence, as “robot-like” or as “mere extras” in their life (e.g. reflected in certain solipsistic “Truman show”-like experiences).

Alterity

Many patients also report transitivistic phenomena, that is, transient experiences of per meability or blurring of self–other boundaries. For example, patients may experience be ing as if “mixed up” with another and being unable to tell which thoughts originate in whom. They may also experience being “transparent” or “radically exposed” in the sense that it is as if others somehow are able to “see” or “know” their 3 thoughts. In our view, the non-psychotic, anomalous self-experiences (“self-disorders”), of which we have described a few above, constitute important sources of social anxiety, social withdrawal, and of the social difficulties frequently reported by patients (cf. Malice and Henriksen 2015: 167).

In acute psychosis, the experience of alterity may undergo dramatic changes. Among the diagnostically important first-rank symptoms of schizophrenia, initially described by Sch eider (1950 ), we find delusion of thought insertion, withdrawal or broadcasting, and pas sivity phenomena. These delusions articulate primary pathological experiences of some one or something placing alien thoughts in one’s mind, extracting or stealing certain thoughts, having access to one’s thoughts (e.g. others can hear the thoughts if they stand close by), and controlling one’s body, actions, or will, etc.

Other important and frequently reported first-rank symptoms are auditory verbal halluci nations in the form of a running commentary or discussing “voices.” Here, parts of the patients’ inner speech or dialogue appear to have become automated, morbidly (p. 386) objectified, and acquired auditory or quasi-auditory qualities, allowing the patients to “hear” their loud and unfamiliar thoughts as alien voices. Crucially, the “objects” of such delusional and hallucinatory exp riences are typically not unproblematically inscribed in the intersubjective world. Rather, they always appear “insufficiently objective” and continue to carry a residual layer of sub jectivity (Paras and Henriksen 2016: 82). In short, primary delusion and auditory verbal hallucination in schizophrenia seem to presuppose and occur in another “modal space,” looming up before the patient alone (Sass 1994: 46; Radcliffe 2012; Paras and Henriksen 2016 )—as Merleau-Monty puts it with regard to hallucinations, they “play out on a differ ent stage than that of the perceived world” (2012: 355). This observation has been partly corroborated by Aggernæs (1972 ), who explored the “status of reality” of hallucinatory experiences in schizophrenia and found inter Ilia that patients typically experience their hallucinatory “voices” as intrinsically “private,” that is, the “voices” are experientially giv en to them (i.e. not inferred by them) in such a way that they usually do not expect others to be able to hear the “voices” they hear.

According to Schneider, permeability of self–other or self–world boundaries (“ ‘Dürchläs sigkeit’ der ‘Ich-Umwelt-Schranke’ ”) and the implied waning sense of self are crucial sources of the first-rank symptoms (1950: 136). In schizophrenia, the tacit sense of selfpresence, which usually persists across the flux of time and changing modalities of con sciousness, saturating our experiential life with an indefinite, yet vital feeling of “mine Bess,” is unstable or threatened ( Paras and Sass 2011; Paras and Henriksen 2014: 254– 255). Recently, Paras and Henriksen (2016: 83–85) have argued that this wavering sense of self-presence in schizophrenia may “de-structure” experiential life, affecting the very Alterity articulation of the “me-not-me” or “self–other” distinction and thereby enabling a “radical alterity” or “another presence” to emerge in the midst of the patient’s own subjectivity (cf. Henriksen and Paras 2014: 545). This “radical alterity” may take several different forms in the pre-psychotic stage of the illness, for example, a feeling that some of one’s thoughts are not really one’s own, experiences as if one’s body, parts of it, or one’s own bodily movements are not truly one’s own, permeability of self–other boundaries, and the experience as if something or someone in one’s peripersonal space is “drawing near” ( An wesenheit ). In different illness stages and depending on the patient’s “psychotic 4 work”, this “radical alterity” may materialize into a persecuting, influencing, or hallucinatory other (Paras and Henriksen 2016: 85). In brief, radical alterity seems to enable a profound sense of self-alienation to grow from within the disturbed subjectivity. Although experiences of radical alterity need not be, and typically will not initially be, ex periences of alterity in the narrow sense that we have focused on in this chapter, some of them may eventually develop into an experience of another agent’s or pseudo-agent’s presence in the midst of one’s own subjectivity—for example, someone (or something) lis toning to, looking at, or touching you (i.e. delusion of being bugged, filmed, or controlled, respectively) or speaking to or about you (i.e. auditory verbal hallucination).

(p. 387) Conclusion We have outlined a broad and a narrow definition of “alterity” within the phenomenology cal literature. We have also provided examples from classical and contemporary phenom Oenology of both normal and pathological experiences of alterity. Finally, we have high lighted the idea that “radical alterity” is a central feature of the phenomenology of schizo phrenia. PAGE_BREAK Notes: 1 ( ) One might also define “alterity” as all that is experienced as “not me” or “other-thane” (cf. the “non-self” criterion in the broad definition). If alterity is defined in this way, then there is no alterity in our normal experiences of ourselves. But inanimate objects as well as animate creatures would still count as “other.” 2 ( ) For a fuller account of Sartre’s take on alterity, see Overgaard, on which we have drawn in this section. See Critchley (2002 ) for a helpful introduction to Levinas’s take on the topic. 3 ( ) In clinical settings, sustained avoidance of eye contact may be a sign of the patient harboring transitivistic experiences. 4 ( ) Ey employs the term “psychotic work” ( le travail psychotique ) to denote the cognitive efforts involved in making sense of one’s pathological experiences.

Søren Overgaard Søren Overgaard is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Open haven. He is the author of Husserl and Heidegger on Being in the World and Alterity Wittgenstein and Other Minds, and a co-editor of The Rutledge Companion to Phenomenology.

Mads Gram Henriksen Mental Health Center Glostrup, University Hospital of Copenhagen Alterity Wittgenstein and Other Minds, and a co-editor of The Rutledge Companion to Phenomenology.

Mads Gram Henriksen Mental Health Center Glostrup, University Hospital of Copenhagen Time # Time Federico Leon The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, History of Western Philosophy (Post-Classical) Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords The idea of time plays a central role in modern philosophy. Modern philosophy does’t want to investigate Being, but a particular kind of Being, namely the Being of the subject which investigates Being. Then it identifies the subject with its capacity of thinking, per caving, sensing, judging, and isolates the condition of this capacity in an operation of all further operations. Time is this transcendental operation. In other terms, time is synth sis, namely the capacity a subject has to be present to himself in order to be present to the world. This presence to presence which is time is the most profound structure of the subject, and when time becomes bodily synthesis, namely the operation of a living body which feels itself living, then psychopathological experience becomes the intermittence, the fragmentation, the impossibility of the body itself. An entire landscape of profoundly innovating readings of what we call madness becomes possible.

Keywords: Descartes, Kant, Husserl, Merleau-Monty, Maldiney, body, time, presence # From Being to Time THE problem of time plays a central role in modern philosophy; it is not simply a privy legged object of inquiry, but also the background of any other inquiry. Philosophical invest Cations no longer revolve around Being, as it was the case with the ancients and, em blematically, with Aristotle. With Descartes, and later on with Kant, Husserl, and Heideg ger, Being is no longer interrogated directly, but only indirectly. It seems that the mod Urns cannot reach Being anymore, unless through a long detour in the course of which the journey itself becomes the final destination. For the moderns, the subject is the door leading to Being, and the subject has become essentially temporal. As a result, time has become, first, the door leading to Being and, ultimately, Being itself. In his Discourse de la méthode and Meditations de prim philosophic, Descartes, with the famous exercise of methodical doubt, has brought us to the threshold of this develop Bent. My own experience might play tricks on me, Descartes argues: I might be dream Time ing what I see; an evil genius might be implanting all sorts of illusions in my mind. How ever, the fact that I am having an experience and I am thinking is indubitable, and implies that, as I think, I also exist—at least as a thinking being. For Descartes, this tiny but ind structible evidence is the only foundation on which a new and hopefully conclusive form of knowledge can be built.

It is clear that at the core of Descartes’s intellectual gesture lies a powerful cultural sprat egy: this is the Trojan horse of a resolutely anti-traditionalist battle, so to speak, a battle for the necessity of getting rid of what we think we know just because others have claimed or substantiated it. My self, my clear critical consciousness is the only criterion of validity, the only testing ground for a knowledge that aspires to the status of science. However, there is another, more properly philosophical side to Descartes’s attitude. The forced passage through the needle eye of the cogito implies that it would be naive to speak directly of things, reality or Being, because first of all we must become aware of the fact that the things of which we speak are, in fact, spoken things, and, in a broader sense, the things of which we have experience, perception, memory, and so on. In other words, there are never simply “things,” but there is always and primarily our experience of things. The subject therefore is not just the criterion of a free rational examination, but has become the epistemological foundation of knowledge (p. 390) in general and the spec ulative root of a more or less explicit reduction of Being to being-thought. More precisely, it is the presence of the subject to itself that becomes foundational.

It is clear that at the core of Descartes’s intellectual gesture lies a powerful cultural sprat egy: this is the Trojan horse of a resolutely anti-traditionalist battle, so to speak, a battle for the necessity of getting rid of what we think we know just because others have claimed or substantiated it. My self, my clear critical consciousness is the only criterion of validity, the only testing ground for a knowledge that aspires to the status of science. However, there is another, more properly philosophical side to Descartes’s attitude. The forced passage through the needle eye of the cogito implies that it would be naive to speak directly of things, reality or Being, because first of all we must become aware of the fact that the things of which we speak are, in fact, spoken things, and, in a broader sense, the things of which we have experience, perception, memory, and so on. In other words, there are never simply “things,” but there is always and primarily our experience of things. The subject therefore is not just the criterion of a free rational examination, but has become the epistemological foundation of knowledge (p. 390) in general and the spec ulative root of a more or less explicit reduction of Being to being-thought. More precisely, it is the presence of the subject to itself that becomes foundational.

On closer inspection, the Cartesian subject is in fact a presence that relates to itself as a presence, a relationship of the subject with itself. “I know that I am thinking, I feel that I am feeling, I experience the fact that I am having this experience”: this doubling is fund mental and inescapable. It is a recursive, circular, and autoaffective operation, which cre Utes the space in which every other presence can find its place and meaning precisely as a presence that meaningfully exists for the subject only within such absolute dimension. This way, the question of time—implied or outlined in embryo in these pages—timidly en Hers the scene, ready to take center stage in modern philosophical debates. Once the pieces of the philosophical game are positioned in this way, the centrality of time be comes necessary and unavoidable. To be sure, the subject’s presence to itself remains a profound mystery, which allows for different readings already in Descartes and in the dis cessions he entertains with his interlocutors. The first possibility is that such self-pres Once is immediate, instantaneous, and extra-temporal—an intuition enclosed in a sort of eternal instant. Here, time is a motionless instant. The second possibility is that this selfpresence is mediated, articulated in a kind of syllogism, so that this experience (which is the key to all other experiences) becomes a construction, a discourse that leads from premises to conclusions. Time itself here becomes speech, journey, chronology, and move Bent. In one way or another, however, once the subject has taken a foundational role, the foundation of everything in fact coincides with the enigma of the unity of the subject with itself and the mystery of its temporalization or self-temporalization.

Time

Time and Subject There is a more or less direct line that connects Descartes to Kant in relation to this prob lem. Kant’s famous metaphor of the Copernican revolution, which opens the Critique of Pure Reason, almost literally reproduces the Cartesian approach and its method of inquiry. To this date, Kant argues, philosophers have followed a Ptolemaic approach. They addressed the problem of knowledge by placing the object of knowledge at center stage, with the knowing subject rotating around it. This resembles a bit what the ancients dissociative identity disorder, who—precisely from a Ptolemaic perspective—placed Being at the center (as in Aristotle) and from it directly derived certain characteristics or, if you will, a certain knowledge concerning those characteristics. The earth was at the center of the universe, and it laid down the laws for its inhabitants. Being dictated the rules of the philosophical game and imposed its contents on any form of knowledge about Being, that is, on ontology or meta physics. However, from now on, says Kant, we must proceed in the opposite direction: a Copernican approach must be adopted. We must put the subject at the center and let the object orbit around it. In other words, it is time to admit that there is no such thing as a direct access to the object, but only an indirect one, mediated by the stained glass of our mind and the transcendental bias of our experience. The object can no longer prescribe its laws to our experience; rather, it is the subject that dictates the law of its experience to an object that is no longer “in itself” but always and only “for us.” Essentially, we are time, and the law of our experience is nothing but the law of self-temporalization of the subject.

(p. 391) Kant’s treatment of the problem of time is extremely complex and profound and can of course only be sketched here. Let us say first of all that the Copernican revolution, in the Kantian sense, still implies that the subject receives a series of impressions “from the outside”—a “rhapsody” of sensible data, as Kant writes in order to emphasize the dis orderly nature of this process. However, the very nature of the Copernican revolution suggests that such disorder is then inscribed in a form, in a pattern, or in a grid, which operates “from the inside” of the subject. The nature of this form or pattern or grid is pre Wisely temporal. It works roughly in the following way: first, we must assume that the sub Sect is present to itself or, better, that it has become one with this activity of making itself present to itself. Kant calls this activity “synthetic unity of transcendental apperception.” In other words, the subject keeps relating to itself and reuniting with itself, in a kind of dull pulsation or secret litany: “I, who am still myself, who am still myself....” This sub Sect or unitary and continuous activity is the point where a kind of space emerges in which the multiplicity of experience can be accommodated. This manifold experience finds its place in a series of distinct and discontinuous locations created by that pulsation or litany. Kant calls this activity “analytic unity of transcendental apperception.” From the encounter between the raw material of sensitivity and the a prior form of the litany, a sort of transcription emerges that is experience itself, a transcription that we could pic Cure as the marks left by the pen of a seismograph which records, in a necessarily linear manner, the motions of the earth on a roll of paper that eternally rotates in a circular manner and, moreover, around a motionless pivot. Here is the second version of this pul Time Cation or litany of experience: “I, who am still myself, have now heard this, and I, who am still myself and therefore can say that before I heard this, I have now heard also that, and then I, who am still myself and heard this and that, perceive now this other thing.”

It is easy to realize that, in a nutshell, Kant’s treatment of the problem already followed the path later taken by Husserl’s and Heidegger’s investigations and perhaps even include ed their solutions to it. In Kantian terms, we could say that the unity of the subject is the matrix of the unity of the object. In other words, the self-temporalization of the subject— its being in relationship with itself or its being nothing but a relationship with itself—con statutes the very structure of the object, the locus in which the object can manifest itself in a variety of ways; in short, it represents the meaning of its objectivity understood as a peculiar “tingly” substance or depth.

Time and Body This is the path later followed by Husserl. His phenomenology is always, on the one side, a phenomenology of perception focusing on the world’s self-donation to a subject that records its presence through the senses, and, on the other hand, a phenomenology of time or (as reads the title of a volume collecting his lectures on the topic) of “inner timeconsciousness,” namely a phenomenology of the way in which the sensible presence of things is recorded through the original, Effective, and autoaffective presence of the sub Sect to itself. It is easy to detect the influence of the Kantian model. However, Husserl’s analysis, when compared to Kant’s, strikes for its exceptional accuracy and descriptive concreteness, and even more for the extraordinary attention devoted to the problem of the subject’s self-temporalization (p. 392) as autoaffection. Husserl literally shifts the Kantian temporal synthesis backward and relocates it in the depths of the body, thereby transferring what Kant called the “I think” directly into the Lab, to use the language of Husserl’s phenomenology. It is a move of enormous consequences, because it means to shift the synthesis from the “I”—which Kant always kept distinct from the disorder and meaninglessness of sensitivity—to the very dimension of sensitivity and passive percep son. As a result, sensitivity emerges as a faculty endowed with a form of its own, a capac ity to generate order and meaning or to embody all possible meanings, without the need for additional disembodied and multi-layered transcendental foundations.

This overall development is clearly visible if one follows the path that leads from the lec Cures on the For the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Inner Time (1991; which col Sect texts of the 1893–1917 period) and from Ideas for a Pure Phenomenology and a Phe nomenological Philosophy to the late and extraordinary Lectures on Passive Syn thesis. In brief, one could say that for Husserl, and especially for the late Husserl, time coincides with the subject, but the subject is the body. With its paradoxical overtones, the expression “passive synthesis” is clear evidence of such development—in fact, when read through the lenses of traditional philosophy, it sounds like a true oxy moron. For Kant, the synthesis is an active process performed by the subject or, as I said above, the subject itself as process and activity. Passivity, instead, means receptivity of Time chaotic and meaningless sensitive data independently of time and the order provided by it. For Husserl, on the contrary, synthesis and temporalization happen before any subject Dive act and process of temporalization.

We could find this bodily comprehension of time operating in some ways already in Husserl’s notes For the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Inner Time. Presence, he says, always undergoes two different tensions, two peculiar intentionalities, retention and pretension, which form the depth and the sense of presence itself. Retention retains past within presence. Pretension opens presence to the future. But retention and proven son are not operations of the subject, are not intentionalities enacted by consciousness, are not active and objectivating syntheses. They are forms of immanent, subjective, pas chive intentionality, immanent to sensible presence itself. Long before subject, its intel tonality, its imaginative syntheses and its semiotic operations, presence itself is “opera ing” and “anonymous” intentionality, as the late Husserl says. And the form of this Emma Bent intentionality is double. On the one side persistence of the presence and inner Jodi fixation of presence in past (retention); on the other side anticipation of future and Jodi fixation of presence itself in future (protection). Time is this continuous yet articulated bodily structure, this immanent yet self-unfolding and self-transcending complexity, this material and sensible passivity yet capable of engendering transcendence and subjective son. And it is this body-time which is altered, differently articulated, peculiarly accentual ed, within the different forms of psychopathological experience.

We could find this bodily comprehension of time operating in some ways already in Husserl’s notes For the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Inner Time. Presence, he says, always undergoes two different tensions, two peculiar intentionalities, retention and pretension, which form the depth and the sense of presence itself. Retention retains past within presence. Pretension opens presence to the future. But retention and proven son are not operations of the subject, are not intentionalities enacted by consciousness, are not active and objectivating syntheses. They are forms of immanent, subjective, pas chive intentionality, immanent to sensible presence itself. Long before subject, its intel tonality, its imaginative syntheses and its semiotic operations, presence itself is “opera ing” and “anonymous” intentionality, as the late Husserl says. And the form of this Emma Bent intentionality is double. On the one side persistence of the presence and inner Jodi fixation of presence in past (retention); on the other side anticipation of future and Jodi fixation of presence itself in future (protection). Time is this continuous yet articulated bodily structure, this immanent yet self-unfolding and self-transcending complexity, this material and sensible passivity yet capable of engendering transcendence and subjective son. And it is this body-time which is altered, differently articulated, peculiarly accentual ed, within the different forms of psychopathological experience.

The example of the two hands touching each other, in Husserl’s Ideas for a Pure Phenom Oenology, is perhaps the clearest and most accurate example of the enormous attention de voted to this knot between time and body within phenomenological tradition. By touching the left hand, Husserl writes, the right hand plays a subjectivating function, while the touched left hand is objectified. The two experiences can be reversed at any moment: the touching hand can always become the touched one and vice versa. However, both hands are part of a body that through them touches and recognizes itself, while at the same time evading and alienating itself. What for Kant was a peculiarity of the self, namely (p. 393) a relationship with itself through which the self alienates itself in order to recon Size itself as identical with itself, thereby being simultaneously one and many, eternal and temporal, transcendental and empirical—all this is “backdated,” so to speak, by Husserl and relocated at the level of the living body. Husserl’s example was further expanded by Maurice Merleau-Monty in one of the most famous chapters of his last and unfinished work, The Visible and the Invisible. Merleau-Monty’s notion of “flesh” exemplifies this complex relocation of the transcendental into the body and its unstable pulsation be tween the anonymity of a desubjectivized flesh and the emergence of a subjectivized body —a body still poised over a desubjectivization that is both menacing and joyous, full of an gush and eroticism.

Time

Time and Event In Heidegger also there is no subject, but there is Casein, the “being-there,” or “beinghere,” according to the translation of the German term regularly employed by Heidegger —since his early masterpiece Being and Time —in place of the traditional term for “subject.” Casein, however, as Heidegger clarifies, is always and immediately In-der-Welt- San: “being-in-the-world.” For Heidegger “always” or “immediately” do not mean “at a second moment in time,” as when subject encounters the world or something in the world is perceived by a subject. On the contrary, what he means is that our being-in-the world is still the world: it is a “fold” of the world and not something different from it. In other words, the being-in-the world is the world folding on itself and revealing itself as other than itself and, at the same time, as nothing other than itself.

To Heidegger’s radically phenomenological gaze, every previous phenomenological study of experience appears built on a prejudice, or at least on a too restricted and unduly gen realized factor, that of the cognitive relationship. The cognitive relationship theory pre supposes a subject distinct from the world, which only at a second moment in time, and somehow accidentally, encounters the world. Hence stems the primacy accorded to per caption in the phenomenology of Husserl and Merleau-Monty, and also the idea that the subject was an insufficient category that needed to be expanded in the direction of the body as a locus of sensitivity. This meant to transfer to the body what Kant had located in a transcendental sphere created in the image and likeness of a self. Heidegger thinks dif fervently. He believes that the act of doing, and not simply knowing, provides the raw ma Aerial for a phenomenology of experience and existence. By definition, this act is not con templative and does not presuppose an observing subject and an observed object or an essentially perceiving subject waiting for a series of stimuli coming from an object. The object is first encountered in a dimension of use, instrumentality, solidity, resistance, and physical contact. The hand, rather than the eye, is at the center of Heidegger’s investiga son. Heidegger substitutes the subject for a hand that interacts concretely and immedi Lately with the world. In place of the object, he places a thing, whose concreteness, every day nature, and materiality are brought to the foreground through his lively descriptions. The profound meaning of Heidegger’s view is that experience is not an arrow going from the subject to the object or from the object to the subject, but is rather like an open space stretching between subject and object, a third space of which the subject and the object are the effects, or, worse, the abstractions. There is a world, and there is a being-in-theworld, precisely because there is a dense network of practices, (p. 394) occupations, ges Cures, and affections in which we are always immersed unknowingly and unintentionally, or at least independently of a previous awareness or decision.

The consequence of this, however, is that time is no longer in the subject, as Kant or the early Husserl thought. Nor is it in the body, as the late Husserl believed. Nor is it exactly in the extended, intercorporeal, and even interspecific body, which ultimately coincides with the world itself, as Merleau-Monty suggested with his notion of flesh. Time is the world folding on itself and unfolding away from itself in every occurring gesture or pram ice or event, be it great or small, epochal or ordinary. Time, more precisely, is Being fold Time ing itself, thereby sending itself to itself, in itself, and away from itself. Time is this triple movement that Being itself undergoes, or more precisely performs, or more simply is. Time is Being: this is the conclusion Heidegger famously reached—thirty years after the publication of Being and Time —in a lecture he entitled, with a significant inversion, On Time and Being. The journey begun with Descartes comes to an end and seems to have inverted its course. Our temporality is not the stuff of Being. On the contrary, the temporality of Being is what constitutes us. Such abyssal temporality is the unfolding of Being in its infinite forms, including those of our world and our being-in-the-world.

From Phenomenology to Psychopathology Phenomenological psychopathology is profoundly indebted to this long tradition of filo sophical discussions on the nature of time and has derived from it the idea that in the psy chopathological experience the possibility of temporalization or self-temporalization is im paired, the synthetic activity of what Kant called the self is difficult or impossible, the Husserlian autoaffective dimension of the living body is lacerated, and the event of Being as a modern dimension of temporality in the Heideggerian sense is forcluded. However different, all these forms of experience have something in common: their temporality is “out of joint,” to use Shakespeare’s expression. As a result, the subject’s experience, which revolves around time or takes the form of those deeper processes that we gather under the notion of “time,” is in turn out of joint and has become literally delusional.

Of course, this kind of temporal dislocation comes in different forms depending on the pa taint, and, more generally, varies according to his or her psychopathological condition (melancholy, mania, schizophrenia, paranoia, obsession, and so on). In his most pro Bounced Husserlian phase, Binswanger ( Melancholy and Mania ) believed that if Husserl’s temporal synthesis required a “moment of living presence”—which included the dimensions of retention and protection—then each major form of psychopathological ex perience stemmed from the collapse of the inner proportion or balance between those three dimensions. According to this view, a melancholic experience is one in which reten son has crushed all other temporal dimensions, turning the past into an unchangeable and impenetrable burden. In the manic experience, instead, the subject’s presence has freed itself from retention and protection and has completely abandoned itself to a shim Bering, elusive, and insubstantial present. In the schizophrenic experience, finally, pro Mention has prevailed over presence and retention, thereby reorganizing time and expert Once around a distressing future, which must be constantly deciphered in its catastrophic and essentially unavoidable coming.

(p. 395) According to Kimura Bin’s extraordinarily eloquent rendering ( Écrits de psy chopathologie phénoménologique ) of this type of structural phenomenology of psy chopathological experience, the melancholic experience takes place essentially post fes tum, the manic experience infra festum, and the schizophrenic one ante festum. Bin bor rows these Latin expressions from the Marxist philosopher György Lukacs, who used them to designate the Revolution as the feast or event par excellence. However, if we un Time derstand the event as something that is happening here and now, the melancholic person is, for the Japanese psychiatrist, essentially incapable of participating in it because the structure of his temporality inevitably transforms the present event into a past one; the manic person, on the other hand, can never participate in the event because somehow he coincides with the event itself and with its kaleidoscopic changeability; the schizophrenic person, finally, can never participate in the event because the event is always still to come and is perceived as so unprecedented that it becomes incommensurable with what is al ready known and ultimately unbearable. Bin’s analysis and reinterpretation of psy chopathology draws, on the one hand, from Husserl’s transcendental approach and, on the other, from Heidegger’s deconstruction of transcendental subjectivism and from his event-centered ontology. Quite originally, Kimura Bin has also combined these ideas with themes typical of Japanese philosophy, in particular the notion of Aida (“in-between”), pro pounding a new interpretation of schizophrenic experience as a disruption of the access Ability of the space “in between” ( L’Enter. Une approche phénoménologique de la schizo phrénie ).

Similarly, in his extraordinary reinterpretation of phenomenology and phenomenological psychopathology, Henri Maldiney ( Censer l’Somme et la folic à la lumpère de la Daseins analyze ) has combined two different approaches, one influenced by Husserl and Merleau-Monty, the other indebted to the extreme consequences of Heidegger’s ontology. On the one hand, Maldiney argues, if the temporal synthesis coincides with the bodily synthesis, then the transcendental temporal structural flaw that Binswanger and others have constantly emphasized in psychopathological experience turns out to be, in fact, a transcendental structural flaw of the body itself. More precisely, it turns out to be a strum Aural flaw of one’s body as a transcendental entity, as a body able to play its constitutive role with respect to experience. On the other hand, Maldiney goes on, if the temporal syn thesis is not the act of a subject or a subjective body, but rather the very event of Being (or Being itself as an event), then the alteration that Binswanger’s psychopathology den tidied in the structures of the transcendental temporal synthesis should be seen—at a more profound level—as a failed relationship with the event or with Being, or as a failed relationship of the event with itself or of Being with itself (at least if one carries to its Multi mate consequences Heidegger’s elimination of the subject and its translation in terms of an ontology of the event).

Kimura’s and Maldiney’s models represent some of the most advanced contributions to the phenomenological–psychopathological reflection and outline a still unexplored field of research that promises to be extremely fruitful in terms of conceptual advancement.

Time Heidegger M.. On Time and Being. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Husserl E.. For the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Inner Time. Dordrecht, Boston: Kluwer. Husserl E.. Analysis Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis. Dor Brecht, Boston: Kluwer. Husserl E.. Ideas for a Pure Phenomenology and a Phenomenological Phi losophy, three volumes. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company. Kant I.. Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge Univer City Press. Kimura B.. Écrits de psychopathologie phénoménologique. Paris: Presses Universe tires de France. Kimura B.. L’Enter. Une approche phénoménologique de la schizophrénie. Paris: Dillon. Maldiney H.. Censer l’Somme et la folic à la lumpère de la Daseinsanalyse. Greno ble: Dillon. Merleau-Monty M.. The Visible and the Invisible. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Federico Leon Universityà deli Saudi di Milan, Dipartimento di Filosofia, Milan, Italy Time Heidegger M.. On Time and Being. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Husserl E.. For the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Inner Time. Dordrecht, Boston: Kluwer. Husserl E.. Analysis Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis. Dor Brecht, Boston: Kluwer. Husserl E.. Ideas for a Pure Phenomenology and a Phenomenological Phi losophy, three volumes. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company. Kant I.. Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge Univer City Press. Kimura B.. Écrits de psychopathologie phénoménologique. Paris: Presses Universe tires de France. Kimura B.. L’Enter. Une approche phénoménologique de la schizophrénie. Paris: Dillon. Maldiney H.. Censer l’Somme et la folic à la lumpère de la Daseinsanalyse. Greno ble: Dillon. Merleau-Monty M.. The Visible and the Invisible. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Federico Leon Universityà deli Saudi di Milan, Dipartimento di Filosofia, Milan, Italy Conscience # Conscience Marin Moskalewicz The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Apr 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article proposes a phenomenological view of conscience and argues that it plays a role in the pathogenesis of some mental illness. Taking advantage of Kępiński’s concept of biological conscience, Heidegger’s notion of the call of conscience, and von Gebsattel’s idea of existential neurosis, the article claims that these different epistemological ac counts of conscience refer to the phenomenon of temporal becoming. Original con science, unlike its psychological manifestation, embodies primary values and helps to overcome nihilism that is the root of human suffering. It reveals nothingness and opens the horizon of expectations toward the possibilities of being, which in turn enables the transcendence of oneself. Presented understanding of conscience is relevant for valuesbased practice by pointing at a shared framework of becoming that conditions the very possibility of finding an agreement between conflicting worldviews.

Keywords: phenomenology, psychopathology, nihilism, nothingness, transcendence, Anton Kępiński, Martin Hei dagger, Victor Emil von Gebsattel Every human being has a conscience... It follows him like a shadow when he plans to escape (Kant 1996: 146)

Conscience must apply a measuring stick to the situation one is confronted with, and this situation has to be evaluated in the light of a set of criteria, in the light of a hierarchy of values. These values, however, cannot be espoused and adopted by us on a conscious level—they are something that we are (Frank 1992: 146)

Clinical experience teaches us about the great role played by the disquiet of con science in the pathogenesis of mental disorders (Kępiński 2001: 123)

Conscience

What does the conscience call to him to whom it appeals? Taken strictly, nothing.

The call asserts nothing, gives no information about world-events, has nothing to tell (Heidegger 1962: 318)

Consciousness and Conscience COULD a lack of conformity to what is considered morally good be related to allegedly undeserved suffering of the mind? Evoking conscience, our inner ethical compass, might seem as a step back to premedical models of illness and those religious conceptions that considered it as a punishment for immoral conduct. The idea, however, is less contriver Dial than it initially appears. Both regular disease and mental illness are ethically based concepts. Furthermore, in contemporary psychopathology a clear-cut dis tinction between morally wrong acts and a disease is not always strictly held. If too scrupulous a conscience of a types melancholics, his excessively conscientious personality, makes him prone to a depressive disorder, unremitting ef forts to preserve (p. 398) a clear conscience may lead to adaptation issues. On the other hand, psychopaths do not feel guilt or remorse because they lack conscience. Addictions are difficult to convincingly conceptualize without at least some reference to the notions of weakness of will and personal responsibility. A more recent idea of a moral injury exemplifies the possibility of a dam age done to one’s conscience by participating in or committing immoral acts, where shattering one’s deeply held moral beliefs leads to abnormal anxiety, suici duality, and addiction. Some claim that conscience is a neurocerebral function that is a psychosocially configured phylogenetic precondition of mental illness in general. It is, therefore, quite conceivable that too weak or too scrupulous conscience could contribute to the development of mental pathology.

But the difficulty remains, and it partly lies within the definition. The concept of con science serves as an umbrella term that has been given so many different philosophical exposures that it cannot be immediately clear what it actually denotes. In contemporary English, conscience is the consciousness of one’s moral worth. The term is mostly used when there is a conflict between one’s own and communal values. It indicates recognition of this conflict with a concomitant need to follow an inner guide. Etymologically, con science originates in Latin conscientia meaning knowledge of something or being aware of something, which goes back to the Greek term συνείδησις (syneídēsis ). Both concepts are derivatives of verbs denoting acquiring knowledge. In Antiquity, the term meant most ly consciousness. The view of conscience as the consciousness of good and evil systematic ally grew in the Middle Ages. Starting with Descartes, consciousness has been freed from the moral connotations of conscience and the differentiation of meaning took place in various modern languages.

Conscience

Due to its modern semantic baggage, unlike values and moral responsibility, conscience is seldom talked about in phenomenological psychopathology, but it does not mean it is ir relevant. The principal distinction between any phenomenological view of conscience and the more common sense view, which will be called psychological (as witnessed by the aforementioned examples) is that upon the psychological account conscience is that part of consciousness we are guided by and follow, mostly in the case of a conflict of values, whereas phenomenological conscience is given before any self-conscious theorizing. Psy chological conscience is a reflective awareness of one’s own acts in terms of right and wrong. It becomes apparent through an evaluative judgment related to personal moral standards that can be also related to supposedly divine or non-transcendent moral laws. Even if psychological conscience refers to what phenomenological conscience gives us di Erectly (and not to abstract values or social mores, which to be sure are independent of it), it is argumentative. It is an inner judge that prohibits, inhibits, and exercises control over oneself. When we (rightly) assert that a psychiatric intervention may foster moral growth, we are usually referring to that reflective level. In a more phe nomenological exposition, however, conscience—not unlike the Husserlian account of con sciousness in general —accompanies (at least some, if not all of) our con scions acts as a pre-reflective awareness. It is pre-reflective in the sense that “there are no considerations to weight pro-et-contra, there is nothing for me to deliberate about” ( Backström 2007: 323). Is it also pre-reflective because it is silent—when we present a concrete message of conscience in positive terms, we are already psychology ally responding to its call. Values given through phenomenological conscience are not what (p. 399) we reflect upon—they are ourselves. Phenomenological con science is more original than a fear-based superego. It is not separated from psychology cal moral life but makes it possible. Moreover, conscience from this perspective is not so much a conscience of something. Rather, as we shall see, it is objectless. Its object, as paradoxical as it seems, is nothing—a non-existent potentiality of being. This article presents a phenomenological view of conscience in its biological and existential manifest Cations as derived from the work of Anton Kępiński and Martin Heidegger, in relation with Victor Emil von Gebsattel’s notion of existed ital neurosis. It is argued that these manifestations are two sides of the same coin of be coming, which points to the most original phenomenon of temporality.

Conscience as Natural Self-Control The notion of conscience features prominently in the work of Anton Kępiński, one of the major Polish psychiatrists of the twentieth century. A graduate of the Jagiellonian Univer City in Cracow and the University of Edinburgh, Kępiński was an influential advocate of humanist, axiological, and dialogical psychiatry. His work presents a mixture of phenom nology focused upon understanding the phenomenon of life and first-person experience of mental illness, and anti-naturalistic system theory. Kępiński proposed that we look at mental disorders from a moral point of view, in which values provide a unity to constantly developing personhood.

Conscience

If we look in this way at neuroses, antisocial behaviors, psychosomatic illnesses, addictions, etc., they appear, at least to an extent, as consequences of breaching the moral order. People suffering from these conditions experience a living hell for transgressing moral law inherent in nature, for their harsh negative feelings, for their laziness and reluctance to take the effort of living, for their egoism, etc. Ob Piously, we have no right to deprecate them. Evil, same as death, is intrinsic to the process of life (Kępiński 2001: 119)

Kępiński usage of the word “moral” is disjointed from a conventional moral or immoral conduct. His theory presents a variation of psychophysical monism, in which the measure of good and evil is life itself. Good is what allows the growth of negative entropy and leads to positive affects, evil is what amplifies the processes of entropy and destruction (Kępiński 2001 ). There is a dialectics of creation and destruction at play in all life forms, and, because of that, there is an ontological-axiological conflict within a human being.

Kępiński argued that all organisms are autonomous, open, self-regulating, and teleology cal systems in constant metabolism of energy and information with the environment. They are organized by primary values that orient them toward the future and provide order to lived experience (Kępiński 2001, 2016). Inspired by the cybernetic model of feedback loops, Kępiński defined the highest among the systems of self-control in living organisms as conscience. From cellular to conscious and collective levels, all life constantly passes through three temporal phases—planning, realization, and assessment. Conscience helps to perpetuate the exchange of energy and information and prevents the spatiotemporal collapse that would reduce the metabolism. As such, conscience is an innate, embodied, 1 and constitutive (p. 400) element of the self. The role of the basic, constitutional con science, which is literally a “biological conscience” (Kępiński 2001: 107) is to lead an or 2 ganism toward its greatest possible development. What might this greatest possible de velopment be?

Unfortunately, we do not have a direct control upon constitutional conscience and are un able to know its actual “aims.” Biological conscience manifests itself at a conscious level through “pangs” that are analogous to positive and negative affects understood in terms of a natural system of compensation. In other words, there is a reward for good and pun ishment for evil in nature itself. This conception begets obvious complications and some scholars rightly suggest that it should be limited to value-based intentional feelings in Solving the self (guilt, remorse, hatred) and not to organic, bodily feeling, such as tired Bess. Breaking an innate moral order is supposed to lead to human suf Bering, but this moral order has nothing to do with any rational natural law (Kępiński was not a Thomism). Rather, it is merely focused on the preservation of (individual and species) life. The moral law is apparently the potentiality of being understood in a non-determines tic way—the perpetuation of life through development of new forms of interaction with the environment. In the manner reminiscent of Hans Jonas’s phenomenological philoso Conscience phy of biology, in which all organisms care for their own being, Kępiński points toward freedom pervading all life forms.

Beyond Virtue and Vice This conception reminds us of the ancient idea of a continuum between vice and illness and a possible identity between moral virtue and mental health. Analogically to the fore mentioned moral injury, two notions of evil—evil as sin (committed) and evil as expert Once (suffered)—appear as intrinsically connected. However, Kępiński’s understanding of the continuum is neither reductive—vice is just a disease, nor inflationary—mental illness is really a vice, in the sense that Irwin proposes. It is because neither wrongdoing nor mental illness is prior in his account—they are simply two facets of the same phenom non. As von Gebsattel explains, the question about mental illness that assumes the dualism of somatic and psychological causes is wrongly asked. Analogically, a schism into two types of treatment, the physical and the moral, is a symptom of warped piste mology. Modern decoupling of facts and values—or consciousness and conscience—is it self a part of the trouble.

The examples Kępiński uses in the quote (addiction, antisocial personality) suggest that the inflationary reading is the more appropriate one. On the reductive reading, there is little space for the notion of moral responsibility for one’s predicament—and, hence, for autonomy and freedom which Kępiński would have defended. However, the anti-psychic Grist conclusion—that we are dealing with a primarily moral problem —is far from what Kępiński proposed. Rather, since conscience is essentially a biological (p. 401) phenomenon, vice appears as a sort of natural defect. The natural moral order lies in the very process of temporal becoming. To borrow a phrase from existential philoso phy, the essence of nature lies in its existence—and, therefore, the natural moral order, as the article will argue further on, rests on the potentialities of being in an undetermined future.

Conflict and Transcendence From the perspective of biological conscience, life appears as a task that requires selfregulation. It demands a transcendence of oneself. Kępiński’s absolute morality is nothing more than the natural tells of nature, which, upon a closer look, ap pears as the undetermined potentiality of being. There are no goals in nature beyond the increase of negative entropy. Conscience as self-control extends beyond the present and is inversely proportional to life dynamics. Humans are cursed to live more in the past and future than in the present ( Kępiński 2016). An elementary anxiety resulting from impossi Ability to achieve future projects in the form they were planned pervades the process of the exchange of energy and information with the environment. This anxiety stems neither from the past (unrealized plans) nor from the future (anticipation of failure), but since the two are intertwined, from the temporal movement itself ( Kępiński 2001 ). The anxiety- Conscience based ontological-axiological conflict of becoming generates the movement of human life. When unresolved, this conflict contributes to what is conventionally called a mental ill Bess (to be sure, this does not imply that all mental illness is a result of the unresolved conflict). But since the two operate at the same level, (at least some) mental illness is this impossibility to cope with the conflict in a constructive way. Meanwhile, the possibility of coping given through a degree of freedom stems from the neurophysiological autonomy of an organism.

We are touching here upon the essence of what von Gebsattel (1964 ) termed an existed ital neurosis—a struggle between two elementary forces of becoming, transcendence and nihilism. The nihilistic tendency, much like Kępiński’s entropy, preconditions creativity. As the conflict is the origin of mental suffering, this view fits into the psychodynamic trad son. Consciously, the conflict manifests itself as a tension between a given lack of mean ing and a search for meaning. The existential neurosis also has an intrinsic social aspect, which von Gebsattel presents in the Heideggerian spirit. Originally, everyone is a part of the collective [ das Man ] and its values, a functionary of the system. This is not a quasi-an tipsychiatric claim that the social average is sick—the idea is that the statistically normal occupies merely the surface of the anthropological truth. The system, whatever its actual content, is a universal point of departure for individualized vital becoming. There is no cure for existential neurosis beyond transcending oneself and not succumbing to nihilism. This transcendence reaches toward the future and, when it becomes an ethical action, even toward the “infinite” ( Minkowski 1970: 118). Heidegger’s notion of conscience will clarify this issue.

The Call of Conscience Like Kępiński’s, Heidegger’s conscience does not refer to any reflective theorizing, least to any transcendent principles or norms of one’s own culture. Unlike Kępiński’s, it has the character (p. 402) of revelation. It reveals human existence in its naked truth—as finite and permeated by guilt and angst. As far as the practical side of Heidegger’s fundamental ontology is concerned, conscience plays an elementary role—it manifests finitude at the level of human experience. Like psychological conscience, it points toward guilt, but not in the ordinary meaning of breaching a moral requirement. Existential conscience reveals original guilt accompanying temporal becoming—being guilty of what has not happened and of what will not be chosen. Only because of it, one can become guilty in the common sense of the word.

Heidegger’s conscience calls oneself to oneself. What is calling is the potentiality of being that does not yet exist—the unrealized potential of oneself. It does not, however, call to ward any concrete possibilities of authentic existence as different from the inauthentic one, in which choices have been already made by others. It literally gives one nothing—it merely opens oneself toward the indefinite future. But this nothing is given in a positive sense—as something that one must face. Conscience opens an “abyss of nothingness,” to use Hannah Aren't’s phrase, which appears “before any deed that cannot be accounted Conscience for by a reliable chain of cause and effect and is inexplicable in Aristotelian categories of potentiality and actuality” ( Aren't 1978: 207). In other words, it abolishes the sequence of temporal flow and discloses the previously inexistent potentialities of being, different from the future projected and planned in the bygone present. We could say, following Backström, that conscience reminds us of what we don’t want to be reminded of. It is “a manifestation of our very openness for each other” ( Backström 2007: 330), which is the root of our moral life and is itself situated beyond any explicit moral principles. The psy chiatrist, Medard Boss, Heidegger’s friend who worked with him closely on the psy chopathological application of his philosophy, defined mental health precisely in terms of openness toward the possibilities of being. This openness toward nothingness —and toward the other, to complement Heidegger’s view—is clearly terrifying and one ea girly (and understandably) attempts to cover it up.

The irremediable insubstantiality of one’s own existence cannot be measured by any criterion of some fuller and more successful existence, which is why it can be used as a point of departure of a non-normative approach to psychopathological phenomena. It is this irremediable insubstantiality that is the source of all mental suffering the psychotic and neurotic individuals try to cope with by means of Kari ous cover-ups (Kouba 2014: 123)

Even if anyone may hear the universal message of conscience and choose resolute and authentic existence, it certainly does not imply having a good conscience, which (in some metaphysical way) could defend him from mental illness. Acting in accordance with one’s existential conscience does not automatically lead to a betterment of life. But, in certain circumstances, facing nothingness may ease the troubles imposed by psychological con 3 science so that neurotic guilt and anxiety understood as psychiatric symptoms disappear.

(p. 403) One of von Gebsattel’s anankastic patients was suffering from the pangs of con science reproaching him for not doing anything well enough. It took him hours to accomplish ordinary activities. The patient feared odors that were spread all around him causing pain, shame, and disgust. The underlying threat, von Gebsattel sur Vised, was coming from the “un-form” or death, and the patient’s behavior was a defense mechanism against decay. But his actual disturbance was the impossibility of overcoming nihilism that was blocking his transcendence of himself. His struggle with different forms of decay was really a struggle with his own death—with his nihilistic tendencies. The pa taint could’t cope with nothingness. Temporarily speaking, he could not break away from the past and the all-pervading guilt. Certainly, conscience would not solve his predicament of blocked becoming by enabling him to tell right from wrong. However, if the repulsive odors represent death, hearing the call of existential conscience would ad dress the underlying trouble. It could bring trust into the world in all its unpredictability and allow the patient to live with things being otherwise than imagined. It would free his psychological conscience from moral prohibitions, ease the guilt, and reduce the sump toms. Since it is impossible to overcome nihilism without realizing it first, acknowledging Conscience nothingness underlying all becoming—nothingness that is the core of human vulnerability —would be the first step to achieve mental health.

Contemporary person-centered understanding of mental illness presents an analogous ap roach even if without explicitly utilizing the concept of conscience. Giovanni Stanghellini defines mental pathology as an incapacity to risk “the leap to the Other” ( Stanghellini 2017: 91). Temporarily speaking, the future is the other. Mental pathology understood as an interruption of a dialogue with the alterity of others and oneself is the interruption of the dialogue between the present and the yet-to-come (and not just a pre dictable future whose seeds are anchored in the present). The latter, as far as it has to do with the indefinite potential of oneself and the world, is nothingness.

Being personally engaged in this dialogue with nothingness, patients play an active role not only in making sense of their experiences and presenting symptoms, but also in the course and outcome of their illness. They are responsible for it in the same way that we are all responsible for our involuntary dispositions. For example, the feeling of ontological eccentricity, a core value of persons with schizophrenia, even if given and not chosen, has a voluntary component. Detachment from the shared world has a val ue that motivates autistic behavior. The notion of re sponsibility without blame, as defined by Hannah Packard could be well extended beyond personality disorders to people with schizophrenia, who may be held re sponsible for their preference of eccentricity, even if they are not blameworthy and should not be blamed by their caregivers. Although (at least some) people with schizo phrenia are following their psychological conscience, they are not following the call of ex istential conscience—or their life potential tacitly controlled by what Kępiński meant by constitutive conscience aimed at the greatest possible development—that tells them to open themselves to the possibility of being different from what they are. They reject com 4 mon sense just to dwell in their idiosyncratic worldview. Asking the question whether their values are indeed theirs and not a result (p. 404) of their disease would move us back to the reductive reading. The choice at stake, the choice of conscience, is not merely psy chological but intrinsic to existential becoming.

Conclusion Typically, conscience is related to an evaluative judgment. It has to do with the conscious Bess of what one has done or is planning to do, for which one is morally responsible. Such a conscience either points back and reproves or points forward and warns. When one does not follow its orders, it adds to one’s guilt feelings. And when it is either too weak or too scrupulous, it may contribute to the development of mental illness. In a more phenom ecological account, conscience is a silent witness that is pre-reflectively and pre-theoretic ally lived through conscious acts and that preconditions the evaluative judgment. Con science as a biological–existential phenomenon operates beyond concrete moral prince Ales. This claim does not imply that conscience cannot become “erroneous” (to borrow a Conscience phrase from the Catholic tradition). Its erring, however, has nothing to do with any single moral laws, but only with the possibilities of one’s being in the undetermined future.

The phenomenon of original conscience that facilitates lived becoming (transcendence of oneself) and that can be described in the language of phenomenological biology or xis tential philosophy is, therefore, substantially different from the evaluative judgment. Original conscience reveals primordial anxiety and guilt as well as other truths of the pre carious human existence, of which nothingness is the ultimate ground. Following its call requires certain courage of despair, to use Paul Tillich’s term, which allows taking the anxiety of being upon oneself. It is the courage to be oneself in the face of meaningless Bess—to confront and not hide away from underlying nothingness, and to take the risk of facing the future despite a threat by non-being. The recognition of nothingness through conscience implies an affirmation and thus overcoming of nihilism—“the acceptance of the power of being, even in the grip of nonbeing” ( Tillich 1952: 176). Existential anxiety is not a state to dwell in but a means to remove the anxiety of ordinary conscience. Retreat into obsessive conscientiousness or an antisocial disregard of the moral dimension of life are both a means to avoid true conscience. Controlling oneself or the other covers the un derlying nothingness and substitutes an open, undetermined future with a predictable pattern. On the other hand, living in existential truth can facilitate mental health. Such an understanding of conscience may help to inspire values-based practice by pointing at an underlying, shared framework of becoming which operates beyond the plu Orality and variability of psychological values and conditions the very possibility of finding an agreement between conflicting worldviews.

Acknowledgment The project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programmed under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 659205. PAGE_BREAK Notes: 1 ( ) We shall skip the question of whether all living organisms indeed have a biological conscience and limit ourselves to human beings. 2 ( ) Kępiński distinguishes three layers of conscience. The constitutional conscience that embodies the natural moral order occupies the bottom. A further layer, which is similar to the Freudian superego, grows during early development. Finally, a psychological con science operates fully consciously. There is a tension between these three layers as, e.g. the second or the third layer may influence and distort the underlying order. Alternative Conscience ly, the damage of the constitutional conscience puts the weight of decision-making upon the psychological conscience, which supposedly leads to a permanent anxiety.

3 ( ) Psychological conscience may well internalize the denial of freedom and contribute to an automatic way of being. One example for Kępinski were the Nazis, for whom obedi Once became the principal rule of conscience and a means to escape from the natural freedom ( Kępiński 1983). Such collective “conscience,” however, clearly wipes out con science understood as openness, and it is a product of secondary, reflective mediation be tween one’s own and communal values. Hence, even if someone evokes the concept of conscience when speaking of his moral demands, he may refer to morality in the ordinary sense of mores and thus misinterpret conscience.

4 ( ) We must be careful in distinguishing schizophrenic praise of eccentricity from Heidegger’s highly individualistic account of resoluteness as a response to the call of con science.

Marin Moskalewicz Department of Social Sciences, Poznan University of Medical Sciences and The Ox ford Research Center in the Humanities (TORCH)

Understanding and Explaining # Understanding and Explaining Christoph Hurl The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Aug 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter examines Karl Jasper’s influential distinction between understanding and explaining, and its significance in psychiatry. It first outlines one way of interpreting the distinction, on which it is connected to the distinction between singular and general causal claims. It then discusses one reason for thinking that understanding has an Essen ital role to play in psychiatry: Not achieving at least some level of understanding in the context of dealing with psychiatric patients would constitute a particular kind of epees temic failure—a failure to recognize their illness for the particular type of illness it is. Drawing on some ideas recently put forward by Kenneth Kendler and John Campbell, it al so illustrates the particular kind of understanding that is crucial in this context.

Keywords: understanding, explaining, Karl Jasper, psychiatry, psychopathology, singular causation # Introduction WE have some intuitive idea that psychiatric disorders constitute a distinct sub-group of disorders—a very specific way of being unwell. But what distinguishes this way of being unwell from other ways of being unwell? In this chapter, I want to consider this question in light of a distinction that looms large in Karl Jasper’s General Psychopathology, and which has been at the heart of phenomenological psychiatry ever since. This is the dis tinction between understanding, on the one hand, and explaining, on the other. I will first outline one way of fleshing out what the distinction between understanding and explain ing comes to. Having done so, I will suggest that one possible way of thinking of what is distinctive specifically of psychiatric disorders is that they constitute a particular kind of challenge to understanding: there is a sense in which they both defy and call for under 1 standing at the same time.

Understanding and Explaining # The Basic Distinction As characterized by Jasper, there are a number of different dimensions to the difference between understanding and explaining. For instance, explaining is said to result from re Heated observations, whereas understanding is gained directly “ on the occasion of con fronting human personality” ( Jasper 1997: 303) and is in this sense more akin to a form of direct perception (Jasper 1997: 313). More specifically, understanding is obtained in the course of exercising empathy, or “sink[ing] ourselves into the psychic situation” of the other person (Jasper 1997: 301), whereas explaining is based on drawing inductive infer Fences from the observation of regularities. Understanding proceeds “from within” where as explaining (p. 408) proceeds “from without” ( Jasper 1997: 27). Other terminological contrasts that Jasper also uses to illustrate the difference between understanding and explaining are that between the “subjective” and the “objective,” and that between the “qualitative” and the “quantitative.”

Arguably, however, no precise theoretical framework for capturing the distinction be tween understanding and explaining emerges from these remarks. For instance, Jasper provides no detailed account of what he means by “empathy,” the cognitive capacity that underpins understanding. He simply seems to take an already existing understanding of the notion for granted. Furthermore, he says that “[e]very concrete event—whether of a physical or psychic nature—is open to causal explanation in principle, and psychic processes too may be subjected to such explanation” ( Jasper 1997: 305). Thus, his re mark that understanding proceeds “from within” whereas explaining proceeds “from without” must mean something different from the claim that understanding deals with the “inner” mental life whereas explaining deals only with its outward manifestations.

There is one aspect of Jasper’s characterization of the contrast between explaining and understanding, though, that might seem especially puzzling at first sight: Jasper de scribes explaining as the “perception of causal connection” ( Jasper 1997: 27), and goner ally seems to equate explaining with explaining causally (see e.g. Jasper 1997: 301). Yet, his descriptions of the object of understanding, too, seem replete with what, on the face of it, are clearly causal terms. Thus, he says, for instance, that understanding is con corned with “psychic reactions to experience,... the development of passion, the growth of an error, [or] the effects of suggestion” ( Jasper 1997: 302f., my emphases). In each case, he arguably does’t just have a temporal sequence in mind, but specifically a causal one. But then in what sense is understanding different from the grasp of causal conned sons involved in explaining?

I think there is a way of resolving this last puzzle that can also help shed light on some of the other characterizations Jasper gives of the distinction between understanding and explaining. The phrase Jasper actually uses most frequently when speaking of the dis tinctive subject matter of understanding is “how one psychic event emerges from anoth er” (Jasper 1997: 27, repeated e.g. at 301). Again, this seems to indicate a causal con Section, but it is also suggestive of the idea that understanding involves causal knoll Understanding and Explaining edge of a particular sort. Consider the following passage from Elizabeth Anscombe’s arch cle “Causality and Determination”: [C]Causality consists in the derivativeness of an effect from its causes. This is the core, the common feature, of causality in its various kinds. Effects derive from, arise out of, come of, their causes. [A]Analysis in terms of necessity or universality does not tell us of this derivedness of the effect; rather it forgets about that. For the necessity will be that of laws of nature; through it we shall be able to derive knowledge of the effect from knowledge of the cause, or vice versa, but that does not show us the cause as source of the effect.

(Anscombe 1981: 136)

The question Anscombe is concerned with in this passage concerns the relationship be tween two types of claims, sometimes referred to as singular causal claims and general causal claims, respectively. General causal claims state causal laws—“smoking causes heart disease” is a standard example. They are what Anscombe means when she speaks 2 of an analysis of causal connections “in terms of necessity or universality,” and her claim is that such an (p. 409) analysis leaves out what it actually is that causation consists in. In soar as such causal laws hold, they hold only because of a more fundamental type of causal relation obtaining on the level of particular events, as expressed by singular causal claims such as “Jane’s smoking caused her heart disease.” What makes such claims true are just facts about that specific individual and what happened to her, independently of whether such facts also form parts of a wider pattern.

In light of these considerations, one way of making sense of what Jasper means when he says that understanding is concerned with “how one psychic event emerges from anoth er” is in terms of the idea that understanding furnishes us specifically with knowledge of instances of singular causation in the psychic domain—of how, in Anscombe’s similar vo cabulary, psychic events “derive from, arise out of, come of” each other. It is this kind of causal knowledge that we gain when we are able to “sink ourselves into the psychic situ son” of the other. Explaining, by contrast, as Jasper thinks of it, seems to be concerned with establishing general causal laws—it may be successful in identifying repeated pat terns, but, in doing so, it deals with causal connections only “from without” insofar as it delivers no insight into what the relevant causal connection actually consists in. This would also explain why Jasper thinks that understanding requires “a fresh, personal in tuition... on every occasion” ( Jasper 1997: 317): certain psychic events may give rise to others in an individual case in a way that is understandable, even though it is not true 3 that they do so generally.

Understanding and Explaining # Understanding and the Nature of Psychiatric # Disorder Why might it be important, as Jasper clearly thinks it is, for the psychiatrist to exercise understanding, rather than just seeking to explain? I think one line of thought that can be seen to emerge from General Psychopathology is that not achieving at least some level of understanding in the context of dealing with psychiatric patients would constitute a par titular kind of epistemic failure—a failure to recognize their illness for the particular type of illness it is.

There are two aspects to this line of thought, which I want to connect to two sets of re marks Jasper makes. The first of them concerns the relationship between psychic illness and what Jasper terms “the objective mind”: The basic phenomenon of mind is that it arises on psychological ground but is not something psychic in itself; it is an objective meaning, a world which others share.

The individual acquires a mind solely through sharing in the general mind... The general or objective mind is currently present in social habits, ideas and comm nal norms, in language and in (p. 410) the achievements of science, poetry and art.... This objective mind is substantially valid and cannot fall sick. But the Hindi visual can fall sick in the way in which he partakes in it and reproduces it (Jasper 1997: 287)

This conception of the “objective mind,” with its Hegelian undertones, may seem rather 4 alien from the perspective of contemporary philosophy of mind. However, I think at least part of the basic point Jasper is trying to get at can be readily understood. At least im licit in this passage seems to be the idea of a certain priority that the understandable has in our grasp of what psychic illness consists in. The idea, more specifically, would be that psychic illness can only be recognized for what it is by recognizing the patient as someone in possession of a capacity to partake in practices that are understandable, and, in this sense, sharing in the general mind. For what psychic illness consists in is precisely 5 a situation in which this capacity malfunctions.

We can perhaps draw a (limited) analogy here with some remarks Brian O’Shaughnessy (2000 ) has made about the relation between consciousness and other “states of con sciousness.” Consciousness, in this context, is conceived of as the condition of being in touch with reality, the kind of condition we normally enjoy during our waking hours. As O’Shaughnessy argues, consciousness, thus understood, is not just one amongst a num ber of possible states of consciousness such as dreaming or being in a trance. It occupies a special position amongst them—“a position of absolute pre-eminence in the mind” (O’Shaughnessy 2000: 78)—for these other states of mind are what they are only because they are “privatize derivatives [of it], modes of not being in it” (O’Shaughnessy 2000: 73).

Understanding and Explaining In a similar vein, we can see Jasper arguing that psychic illness cannot be understood fully unless we recognize it as a state that is a privatize derivative of our normal ability to engage in understandable practices. As a result, though, psychiatric disorders both seem to call for understanding at the same time as defying understanding. They call for under standing insofar as they call for treating the patient as one capable of engaging in under standable practices. However, insofar as it is precisely that capacity that goes awry in psychic illness, they also, at the same time, defy understanding: to think that the patient could be understood “without remainder,” as it were, would constitute a failure to see psychic illness for what it is.

6 While this kind of view might seem paradoxical at first sight, I think we might be able to make sense of it by connecting it to some remarks Jasper makes about the difference be tween schizophrenic delusions and a phenomenon such as general paralysis, a degenera Dive mental disorder occurring in late-stage syphilis. He says: (p. 411)

In the one case, it is as if an axe had demolished a piece of clockwork—and crude destruction are of relatively little interest. In the other it is as if the clockwork keeps going wrong, stops and then runs again. In such a case we can look for spe civic, selective disturbances. But there is more than that; the schizophrenic life is peculiarly productive. In certain cases the very manner of it, its contents and all that it represents can in itself create quite another kind of interest; we find our selves astounded and shaken in the presence of alien secrets, which in this sense cannot possibly happen when we are faced with the crude destruction, irritations and excitements of General Paralysis.

(Jasper 1997: 576f.)

One way of interpreting Jasper’s clockwork metaphor, and the idea that “schizophrenic life is peculiarly productive” is that, in psychic illness, the particular way in which reason goes awry is not just a diminution or breakdown of mental powers, as it is in general paralysis, but is itself an instance of the phenomenon of “psychic events emerging from one another” that understanding makes manifest. So the idea would be that there is something in principle understandable, at least to some degree, about the process that leads to the pathology, even though, at the same time, the end product of that process— the pathology itself—constitutes an impairment in normal abilities to partake in practices that are understandable.

What might such an attempt at understanding the emergence of pathological thought look like? A question along these lines has recently been discussed by Kenneth Kendler and John Campbell, who consider it specifically in the context of suggestions about the involvement of dopamine in delusion formation. Considered on its own, the idea that dopamine irregularities cause psychotic syndromes obviously belongs firmly into the ate gory of what Jasper calls explanation. That is to say, we may perhaps be able to establish a link between the two phenomena by observing a general pattern of correlations be Understanding and Explaining tween them, but this only gets at the causal connection “from without,” it gives us no in 7 sight into what the causal connection consists in.

As Kendler and Campbell explain, though, what we know about the role of dopamine might also allow us to frame some more specific hypotheses about individual cases. In this context, they consider specifically the way in which midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons have been implicated in the encoding of motivational salience. In a passage quoted by Kendler and Campbell, Kanpur writes: Dopamine mediates the conversion of the neural representation of an external stimulus from a neutral and cold bit of information into an attractive or aversive entity. In particular, the mesolimbic dopamine system is seen as a critical compo Bent in the “attribution of salience,” a process whereby events and thoughts come to grab attention, drive action, and influence goal-directed behavior because of their association with reward or punishment.

(Kanpur 2003: 14)

As Kendler and Campbell point out, against the background of this specific role dopamine neurons have in motivation it becomes possible for us to imagine, at least to some extent, what it would be like to live with a dopamine system that has a tendency to fire at nap propriate times. More specifically, they suggest that in imagining this, we might render the (p. 412) formation of delusions of reference understandable. They consider the exam ple of a patient who is watching the nightly news when his dopamine neurons misfire. As they write: He has the sense of some immediate meaning and importance in the commentator’s comments. He seeks to “discover the meaning” of the event and realizes that the commentator really is looking at him, and notices that his news cast may contain hidden messages to him. It takes little imagination to realize how easily a delusion of reference might emerge from this primary experience.

(Kendler and Campbell 2014: 3)

Kendler and Campbell’s main interest seems to be in the idea that this way of “expanding the domain of the understandable in psychiatric illness,” by taking account of findings in neuroscience, might help us account for the content of particular delusions, such as deli ions of reference. As I said before, though, we need to be wary of thinking that psych attic patients could be understood “without remainder,” for that would arguably consti Cute a failure to see their illness for what it is. This is a common problem with approaches to delusions Campbell elsewhere describes as “empiricist” because they construe deli signal beliefs as “a broadly rational reaction to some very unusual experiences” (Camp bell 2001: 91)—arguably, to do so amounts to a failure to acknowledge their delusional nature.

Understanding and Explaining I think it is therefore important also to recognize another dimension to Kendler and Campbell’s example. Note that, in the process of imagining what it would be like to live with a misfiring dopamine system, as they describe it, another thing that arguably be comes understandable is how difficult it would be in such a situation to retain a capacity to “think straight”—that is to say, how being assailed by events and thoughts that appear to demand our attention or carry a special significance would undermine one’s ability to react to one’s experience in a “broadly rational” manner in the first place.

If this thought is along the right lines, understanding can uncover more than just conned sons between individual mental events—how one might, for example, form beliefs with a certain content in response to certain kinds of experience. It can also uncover some of the preconditions of our very ability to engage in practices that are understandable, and how that ability might itself be impacted upon by particular kinds of experiences. It is in this sense that understanding might be seen, not just as one approach to psychiatric phenom ena amongst others, but as something that plays a crucial role in our ability to see psy chic illness for the particular type of illness it is.

Conclusion I have outlined one interpretation of Jasper’s distinction between understanding and ex paining, taking as my lead his characterization of understanding as being concerned with “how one psychic event emerges from another” ( Jasper 1997: 27). On this interpretation, understanding furnishes us specifically with knowledge of instances of singular causation in the psychic domain. Moreover, I have suggested that there is a special sense in which psychiatric disorders both call for and defy such understanding, insofar as they involve psychic events giving rise to a situation in which the very ability to partake in under standable practices is impaired.

(p. 413) Why dissociative identity disorder Jasper think that understanding was of particular importance in clinical practice? Even if understanding can be interpreted as conveying a type of causal knoll edge, it is at least not obvious that he thought it had some privileged instrumental value in the context of therapy. Rather, as I have suggested in this chapter, another reason for thinking that understanding has an essential role to play in psychiatry is that it is Essen ital to a grasp of the very nature of psychic illness—that is, of the particular way of being unwell that having a psychiatric disorder, distinctively, consists in.

Acknowledgment Parts of this chapter draw on ideas that are further elaborated in C. Hurl. “Jasper on Explaining and Understanding in Psychiatry.” In G. Stanghellini and T. Fuchs (eating disorders.), One Century of Karl Jasper’ General Psychopathology, pp. 107–120. Oxford: Ox ford University Press.

Understanding and Explaining # Bibliography Anscombe G. E. M.. “Causality and Determination.” In: Metaphysics and the Phi losophy of Mind: Collected Philosophical Papers Volume second, pp. 133–147. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Campbell J.. “Rationality, Meaning, and the Analysis of Delusion.” Philosophy, Psy chiatry, & Psychology 8: 89–100.

Campbell J.. “Validity and the Causal Structure of a Disorder.” In K. S. Kendler and J. Paras (eating disorders.), Philosophical Issues in Psychiatry fourth: Classification of Psychiatric Illness, pp. 257–273. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Milan N.. “On Understanding Schizophrenia.” In D. Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self, pp. 97–113. Amsterdam: John Benjamin.

Evnine S. J.. “Understanding Madness?” Ratio 2: 1–18.

Heal J.. “Joint Attention and Understanding the Mind.” In N. Milan, C. Hurl, T. Mc Cormack, and J. Roessler (eating disorders.), Joint Attention: Communication and Other Minds, pp. 34– 44. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jasper K.. “The Phenomenological Approach in Psychopathology.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 114: 1313–1323.

Jasper K.. General Psychopathology, trans. J. Hoeing and M. W. Hamilton. Bali more: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Kanpur, S.. “Psychosis as a State of Aberrant Salience: A Framework Linking Bioko gy, Phenomenology, and Pharmacology in Schizophrenia.” American Journal of Psychiatry 160: 13–23.

Kendler K. S. and Campbell J.. “Expanding the Domain of the Understandable in Psychiatric Illness: An Updating of the Jasperian Framework of Explanation and Under standing.” Psychological Medicine 44: 1–7.

O’Shaughnessy B.. Consciousness and the World. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Notes:

1 ( ) Evnine (1989: 11), too, suggests that we should characterize psychic illness “precisely by the difficulties it presents for understanding.”

2 ( ) Whether causal laws should actually be thought of as stating or implying relations of necessity or universal generalizations is a further question, which we can set aside for present purposes.

Understanding and Explaining 3 ( ) As the passage from Anscombe I have quoted in the text continues: “If A comes from B, this does not imply that every A-like thing comes from some B-like thing or set-up or that every B-like thing or set-up has an A-like thing coming from it; or that given B, A had to come from it, or that given A, there had to be B for it to come from. Any of these may be true, but if any is, that will be an additional fact, not comprised in A’s coming from B. If we take ‘coming from’ in the sense of travel, this is perfectly evident” ( Anscombe 1981: 136).

4 ( ) Perhaps less so the associated idea that understanding is closely connected to partici Bating in joint activities, which Jasper elsewhere expresses as follows: “We understand other people, not through considering and analyzing their mental life, but by living with them in the context of events, actions and personal destinies” ( Jasper 1968: 1313). A similar view can be found expressed more recently, for instance, in Heal.

5 ( ) See also the following remark: “The essence of being human and of being a sick hu man shows itself in the way in which the individual appropriates structures of the mind to his own use and modifies them” ( Jasper 1997: 287f.).

6 ( ) On related issues, see also Milan.

7 ( ) A crucial background issue here is that while we seem to have conceptions for “mete anisms” by which one event causes another both for events within the biological domain and for events within the psychological domain, we have no similar such conception of a “mechanism” connecting events across those two domains. On connected issues, see Campbell.

Christoph Hurl Christoph Hurl is in the Department of Philosophy at the University of Warwick. His research interests include philosophy of mind, epistemology, memory, time, and causal understanding.

Consciousness and its Disorders Consciousness and its Disorders Semi Oyebode The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Aug 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Consciousness is the subjective state of awareness of the sensible world. This chapter fo cuties on the process of being conscious of something, and examines in detail the most significant abnormalities that affect consciousness. Consciousness is distinguished from attention, although both are related. The pivotal role of consciousness in phenomenology is discussed and the tensions between the understandings of consciousness in phenom nology and the manner in which abnormalities of consciousness in practice present and conflict with theoretical notions are examined. Dimensional and qualitative changes in consciousness are dealt with. Delirium, a state of global impairment of cognitive fun sons and reduced level of consciousness, is used as an illustration of the nature of quail Dative changes of consciousness. The subjective experience of disorders of attention in schizophrenia and mood disorders are examined and illustrated by case examples. Final ly, disorders of awareness, in particular unilateral neglect and related conditions, and blindsight are also described.

Keywords: consciousness, attention, awareness, delirium, unilateral neglect, blindsight # Introduction CONSCIOUSNESS is one of the most challenging contemporary scientific and philosophy cal problems. In this chapter I shall focus on the subjective state of awareness of the sen Bible world, which terminates when we go to sleep or are comatose, or dead. However, it is important to emphasize that I am not referring, merely, to the distinction between asleep or awake. To be awake presupposes being conscious. My focus is on the process of being conscious of something, a key feature of Husserl’s phenomenology termed intel tonality, rather than merely being awake. In other words, it is the process of being con scions of something, in the sense in which I am aware that I can see a particular object, hear a particular conversation, recall an episode of my life, or imagine a given situation.

Consciousness and its Disorders To make the point more forcefully, I am not merely writing this sentence but I am inch Lately aware that it is me writing this sentence.

At the outset it is important to distinguish consciousness from attention. Attention refers to the capacity to focus our interest or consciousness on specific aspects of the objective world. This might entail selecting, shifting, and thereby focusing attention, for example, on a passing vehicle rather than on a lamppost. No doubt both processes are related but there is empirical work to show that both processes can operate independently of one an other. The global workplace theory, an influential psychological model of consciousness, uses a theater metaphor in which attention resembles choosing a television channel and consciousness is the picture on the screen. The distinction that is being drawn here is that between selecting an experience and being conscious of the selected event. It is a truism that we are only conscious of a fraction of the information processing going on in our brain at any one time. The function of attention seems to be to select some aspects of stimulus input defined by location in space, a given feature such as shape or by an object. Whereas the function of consciousness pertains to summarizing all the information from the environment that we need in order to ensure that it is available for planning, decision-making, language, rational thought, and setting long-term goals (Tononi and Koch (p. 418) 2008). This is what Jasper refers to as “the immediate expert Once of the total psychic state”. Finally, there is the question whether con sciousness is unitary. A full discussion of this issue is outside the scope of this chapter. Empirical studies conducted by Robert Sperry and also by Gazzaniga (2000 ) raised the possibility that in patients who had undergone surgical div ion of the corpus callosum, each cerebral hemisphere appeared to experience its private and separate sensations and to have independent consciousness. On the other hand, Gaz zaniga and colleagues argued from the same empirical findings that there was only a sin gle consciousness, located in the left hemisphere, always seeking to interpret and explain external events. There is a related but distinct issue, which is not whether consciousness is simple or unitary but whether consciousness is global in nature such that all modular brain functions relate equally to a singular consciousness system or rather whether each specialist brain function such as perception or memory has its own consciousness system. In other words, whether in the event of abnormalities in the visual system, for example, there may be impairments in the awareness of visual experience without corresponding impairments in awareness of auditory experience. There is empirical evidence to support this latter view: in Anton’s syndrome, in which there is impaired awareness of blindness, there is no corresponding general or global impairment of consciousness awareness in other perceptual modalities. Also in “blindsight,” which like Anton’s syndrome, results from injury to the primary visual cortex, subjects can respond to visual stimuli that they do not consciously see. These two examples demonstrate that it is too soon to conclude that a full description of consciousness as a psychological system is yet available to us.

At the outset it is important to distinguish consciousness from attention. Attention refers to the capacity to focus our interest or consciousness on specific aspects of the objective world. This might entail selecting, shifting, and thereby focusing attention, for example, on a passing vehicle rather than on a lamppost. No doubt both processes are related but there is empirical work to show that both processes can operate independently of one an other. The global workplace theory, an influential psychological model of consciousness, uses a theater metaphor in which attention resembles choosing a television channel and consciousness is the picture on the screen. The distinction that is being drawn here is that between selecting an experience and being conscious of the selected event. It is a truism that we are only conscious of a fraction of the information processing going on in our brain at any one time. The function of attention seems to be to select some aspects of stimulus input defined by location in space, a given feature such as shape or by an object. Whereas the function of consciousness pertains to summarizing all the information from the environment that we need in order to ensure that it is available for planning, decision-making, language, rational thought, and setting long-term goals (Tononi and Koch (p. 418) 2008). This is what Jasper refers to as “the immediate expert Once of the total psychic state”. Finally, there is the question whether con sciousness is unitary. A full discussion of this issue is outside the scope of this chapter. Empirical studies conducted by Robert Sperry and also by Gazzaniga (2000 ) raised the possibility that in patients who had undergone surgical div ion of the corpus callosum, each cerebral hemisphere appeared to experience its private and separate sensations and to have independent consciousness. On the other hand, Gaz zaniga and colleagues argued from the same empirical findings that there was only a sin gle consciousness, located in the left hemisphere, always seeking to interpret and explain external events. There is a related but distinct issue, which is not whether consciousness is simple or unitary but whether consciousness is global in nature such that all modular brain functions relate equally to a singular consciousness system or rather whether each specialist brain function such as perception or memory has its own consciousness system. In other words, whether in the event of abnormalities in the visual system, for example, there may be impairments in the awareness of visual experience without corresponding impairments in awareness of auditory experience. There is empirical evidence to support this latter view: in Anton’s syndrome, in which there is impaired awareness of blindness, there is no corresponding general or global impairment of consciousness awareness in other perceptual modalities. Also in “blindsight,” which like Anton’s syndrome, results from injury to the primary visual cortex, subjects can respond to visual stimuli that they do not consciously see. These two examples demonstrate that it is too soon to conclude that a full description of consciousness as a psychological system is yet available to us.

It is often stated that any theory of consciousness must attempt to explain certain basic facts about mental life, namely that a) consciousness has a subjective nature that is unit ed by a unique individual inner perspective; b) that conscious awareness appears to have a quality that is recalcitrant to physical or materialist description; and c) that conscious Consciousness and its Disorders experience is directed toward objects, that is, it is intentional in nature. It is the particu Carly striking inner subjective aspect of conscious awareness that is of prime concern to psychiatrists and I turn to it in the next section. It is not the purpose of this chapter to ex amine whether or not consciousness is a phenomenon that resists cognitive neuroscience reduction. Indeed, phenomenological analysis brackets this discussion whilst engaging in exploration of the acts of consciousness and its objects. In this chapter it is accepted that consciousness is always directed toward objects, that it is intentional in nature.

Consciousness has a pivotal role in Husserl’s phenomenology. Phenomenolo gy is the study or description of phenomenon and it involves the description of things as one experiences them. In other words, phenomenal ogy is concerned in part with subjective conscious experience. For Husserl, conscious Bess is intentional. In Cartesian Meditations he wrote: Conscious processes are also called intentional; but then the word intentionality signifies nothing else than the universal fundamental property of consciousness: to be consciousness of something.

(Husserl 1977: 33)

Husserl’s conception of consciousness demands that consciousness and its intentional ob Sect be inseparable. This point is well made by Hammond et al.: (p. 419)

Acts of consciousness and objects of consciousness are essentially interdependent: the relation between them is an “internal” not an “external” one. That is to say, one cannot first identify the items related and then explore the relations between them; rather one can identify each item in the relation only in reference to the oth er item to which it is related. Acts of consciousness are directed upon objects such that one cannot investigate the acts independently of their objects; and the ob Sects are always objects for consciousness such that one cannot investigate ob Sects independently of investigating the conscious acts of which they are objects.

(Hammond et al. 1991: 48–49)

In Husserl’s terminology, the term “Poetic” describes acts of consciousness and “noemat ic” refers to the objects of consciousness. Acts of consciousness include such possible modes as perception, retention, recollection, expectation, etc. Objects of consciousness include any conceivable object.

To be more exact, Husserl’s phenomenology regards consciousness not as “a particular mundane domain among other domains” but acts of consciousness are considered solely as experiences of objects, in and through which objects ap pear, present themselves, and are apprehended as what they are. If consciousness Consciousness and its Disorders is a unique realm of absolute priority, it is because it is the medium of access to whatsoever exists and is valid.

(Gurwitsch 1976: 166)

Aron Gurwitsch’s account re-emphasizes the primacy of consciousness in the phenomenological reduction but acknowledges that in the natural attitude (without the introspection and analysis of phenomenology) psychology, neuroscience, and psychiatry have different concerns that include establishing how acts of consciousness are causally related to physiological or functional processes.

From the accounts above, it is obvious that there are tensions between the manner in which consciousness is envisaged in the natural attitude and the notion of consciousness as revealed in phenomenological reduction. Phenomenological reduction of consciousness poses problems for psychopathology particularly as psychopathology relates to abnormal ties of consciousness. First, strictly speaking, all psychopathology is best regarded as ab normality of consciousness. In other words abnormalities of perception, of memory and its various functions, and of the imagination are ultimately abnormalities of acts of con sciousness. In this account even behavior is tractable back to consciousness and its con tents. Secondly, given that consciousness and its objects are inseparable, it is problematic to deal separately with abnormalities of consciousness as distinct from descriptions of the objects of consciousness. To develop this point, it is problematic to discuss levels of and qualities of consciousness, for example, as distinct from acts of consciousness or objects of consciousness. This issue identifies a particular conflict between a neuroscience ap roach to the notion of consciousness as opposed to the conceptualization of conscious Bess drawn from a phenomenological standpoint. Finally, phenomenological analysis re quires a description of subjective experience. But, abnormalities of consciousness, as usu ally construed in psychopathology, concern experiences that are characterized by demon stable impairments of the capacity to accurately report subjective experiences.

Karl Jasper’s approach was to eschew the problem posed by inseparability of acts of consciousness and the objects of consciousness by giving an account that treat ed consciousness as distinct from acts of consciousness. He identified three aspects of consciousness, namely a) actual inner awareness, b) a subject–object dichotomy, and c) knowledge of (p. 420) a conscious self. In this account, Jasper used the metaphor of a stage, very reminiscent of the metaphor of a theater that has currency today and that of a medium. These metaphors allowed Jasper to refer to the idea that “the stage can shrink (narrowing of consciousness) or the medium can grow dense (clouding of conscious Bess)”. For Jasper, loss of actual inner awareness is synonymous with loss of consciousness. In Jasper’s conception, attention is conceived as either an active or passive turning toward an object and the degree of clarity and distinctness of the content of consciousness is referred to as the field of attention. Finally, Jasper also comments on the role of attention for “rousing further associations... guiding notions, set tasks, tar get ideas...,” etc..

Consciousness and its Disorders In summary, consciousness is pivotal in Husserl’s phenomenology and hence it is equally important in clinical psychopathology. Phenomenological reduction emphasizes the instep arability of acts of consciousness and objects of consciousness. Yet in the natural attitude consciousness is treated as a distinct feature of mental life without any logical deepen Fence on acts of consciousness or objects of consciousness. Even though this tension be tween the natural attitude to the term consciousness and the understanding that one reaches following radical phenomenological reduction exists, it is a tension that is at its sharpest in discussing abnormalities of consciousness. And, this tension is further accent tufted by the fact that abnormalities of consciousness rely on observations of behavior rather than, as is usually the case in psychopathology, on reports of subjective expert Once.

Finally, empirical experience is contrary to the propounded understandings of conscious Bess—abnormalities of consciousness are evident in the observed limitations in conscious awareness in patients with various kinds of disturbances that impair consciousness. These limitations in consciousness are independent of abnormalities of acts of conscious Bess and objects of consciousness even where these two aspects of consciousness are themselves compromised. To emphasize this point, in an individual who is observed not to be alert, it can also be the case that their perceptual experiences are abnormal as are the perceived objects that they report. Yet, the fact of abnormalities in acts of consciousness and reported in the objects of consciousness are distinct from the demonstrable impair Bents in consciousness per se. This, in my view, confirms that Jasper’s account is more suited to discussing abnormalities of consciousness in psychopathology.

In the next section, I propose to deal with abnormalities of consciousness under the fol lowing headings: a) dimensional changes in levels of consciousness; b) qualitative changes of consciousness; c) disorders of attention, and d) disorders of awareness.

Disorders of Consciousness Dimensional Changes in Levels of Consciousness Impairment of consciousness can be seen as a continuum from alertness through to drowsiness and ultimately coma and death. Lishman (1998 ) makes the point that “consed Arable difficulties can surround the conceptual levels of consciousness of patients with acute organic reactions, partly because of problems inherent in the use of certain terms and partly because of the expectation that impaired consciousness must necessarily be accompanied by (p. 421) decreased responsiveness to stimuli... In most conditions impair Bent of consciousness is accompanied by diminished arousal and alertness.”

Consciousness and its Disorders Clouding of Consciousness Clouding of consciousness represents the early stage on the continuum from alertness to coma and is characterized by deterioration in thinking, attention, perception, memory in the context of drowsiness, and diminished awareness of the environment.

Drowsiness

Drowsiness can be conceptualized as a further stage from clouding of consciousness to ward coma. It is characterized by slowed actions, slurred speech, sluggish responses, and marked lowering of vigilance and awareness of the immediate environment. There is unimpaired avoidance of painful stimuli. Coughing and swallowing reflexes are present but reduced. Muscle tone is low.

Coma

Coma is the term used to describe an unconscious state in which there are no verbal re spouses or indeed any responses to painful stimuli. The righting response of posture is lost, reflexes and muscle tone may still be present but reduced, breathing is slow, deep, and rhythmic, and the skin may be flushed. Distinct stages of coma have been identified and described by Teasdale and Bennett.

Qualitative Changes of Consciousness The dimensional alterations in consciousness as described above rarely presents solely as disturbance of consciousness. There is usually an admixture of alterations in conscious Bess itself as described above, changes in acts of consciousness such as perception, and also variations in the subjective experience of objects of consciousness. The term “deliri um” covers these abnormal experiences.

Delirium

Lipowski defines delirium as “a transient organic mental syndrome of acute onset, characterized by global impairment of cognitive functions, a reduced level of conscious Bess, attentional abnormalities, increased or decreased psychomotor activity and a Visor dared sleep–wake cycle.” Subjective accounts of delirium are rare and there is the prob lem that the (p. 422) experiences during an episode occur in the context of reduced level of conscious awareness and the accounts are retrospective in nature.

Crammer’s account stands out primarily because he was a psychiatrist describing his experiences and he understood (in retrospect) the nature and quality of the experiences. He wrote: During the period 26–30 November I was, for the most part, completely union scions, unaware of the passage of time, the presence of visitors, the attention of nurses and doctors or my transfer by trolley or ambulance from ward to ward and Consciousness and its Disorders hospital to hospital. However, within that period there were several brief fluctua sons (perhaps 5 min or so) in degree of awareness, and subsequently I could re call having some human contact and some idea (partly mistaken) about my where bouts and state of health in these episodes. In the first two episodes I accepted that I was ill in some quite unspecified way and thought that I was to be trans erred for operation (unspecified) first to India and then to Australia; in the fourth episode, although much the same in feeling, I thought that I was changing planes on the flight home from Australia.

Crammer describes his subjective experiences and also attempts to explain them in retro Aspect. He wrote: I come half-awake lying on a vague bed in a very vague room with two young women (in white coats?) standing by my side. I identify them as physiotherapists.

One is dark-haired (Indian?) and says nothing; the other is fair, does the talking and laughingly tells me that I need an operation and it will be best for me to trans fer to India for it, perhaps to a Christian Mission hospital, possibly called Vellore, with which they have a staff exchange programmed (clearly the dark-haired girl). I receive this information passively without curiosity: I do not know or care where I am, or what is wrong with me, although I am prepared to believe I have something requiring treatment and am reassured that it will be well done. I fail to be myself, not very aware of surroundings and with no recollection of any injury or hospital ization.

He continued: [T]he idea of India may have been prompted by the (Indian?) nurse and perhaps by an unconscious memory of a fall in India 3 years earlier [and the idea of Aus tralia by the fact that on] admission to hospital I had been struck by the Australian accents of some of the nurses (and I had read previously in the local paper that Oxford hospitals had imported numbers of Australians to help), although all this was out of the conscious mind. Perhaps an Australian nurse helped me into the ambulance.

Crammer attempts to make sense of his experience in retrospect. He is fully aware of the vagaries of memory and the likelihood of bias but nonetheless his explanations demand our attention.

The impairment of understanding—disorientation, misidentification of others, de velopment of false beliefs—which is the central disturbance in the confusional state, developed slowly as consciousness declined and was based in memory fail ure and inattention. I believed that I was living in Australia, presumably because of an overheard voice, and thereafter held to this belief and denied that I could be or ever had been in the John Radcliffe Hospital (in reality, previously I had been both an out-patient and an in-patient). I thought that I had been at a doctor’s so Dial and checking-in for a flight home. A woman in a white coat was a physiothera Consciousness and its Disorders Dist, not a doctor; the doctor who later inspected my monitors was a flight engi Beer and the nurse was a check-in girl... These are not absurd answers to the self-posed questions (who, where, what (p. 423) is this?) but near-misses based on brief, limited sensory impression with limited associative memory, a sort of guess without any uncertainty or any correction in relation to previous experience or im mediately subsequent events, processes that go on all the time in normal life.

Fleminger, in his comments on Crammer’s account, made the point that Crammer’s experience was akin to dreaming but remembered with more vividness than dreams. He questioned whether the traditional approach of considering delirium as Eris ing from disturbance of consciousness was appropriate and proposed that it might be bet ter to consider delirium as a disturbance of the sleep–wake cycle (arousal) which is why it resembles dreaming so much and why it is more common in individuals with sleep depri Cation.

Twilight State Twilight state is a descriptive term for a condition in which there is a) an abrupt onset and termination; b) variable duration from a few hours to several weeks; and c) the occur Fence of unexpected violent acts or emotional outbursts during otherwise normal, quiet behavior. Consciousness is often impaired and there may be dream-like states, delusions, or hallucinations. It is associated with epilepsy, alcohol intoxication, brain trauma, and dissociative disorders (fugue).

It is an important condition because of its place in forensic settings where it is often used as a legal defense for violent behavior. In the forensic context it is important to demon state prior occurrences of similar episodes with inexplicable behaviors and other object Dive evidence of physical or psychiatric disorders.

Twilight state is insufficiently differentiated from oneroid state. Medina (1950 ) charac terized these phenomena as dominated by confusion, apprehension, fear, hallucinations, and the feeling that events were unreal. Medina thought the condition was comparable to Kahlbaum’s catatonia because it was an independent disorder of unreality. Reports suggest that the patient may experience elaborate visual hallucinations in the context of impairment of consciousness, marked emotional change including terror or exaltation in response to the hallucinations. There may be other hallucinations including auditory and tactile ones. A published case by Fink and Taylor reports the essential features of this state.

[He] talked continuously, night and day. His speech was comprehensible. He was apprehensive, fearful, and hid when people came to the house lest they should kill him. He feared that the police were out to get him. On the fourth, he was mute and catatonic. Progressively he refused food, was negativistic, grimaced and pos Cured, with waxy flexibility and echopraxia. When Autism lifted, his confusional Consciousness and its Disorders state came to the surface. He thought he had grenades in his pockets, and that his father had lost his legs. He failed to recognize his parents.

Stupor

Stupor is a term that refers to “a symptom complex whose feature is a reduction in, or ab Fence of, relational functions: that is, action and speech”. It is distinct from coma in that it does not lie along a continuum from wakefulness to coma. It is prince pally (p. 424) characterized by Autism and akinesis. The patient is fully awake, alert with eyes that are open even if not focused or engaged in direct gaze. There may be impair Bent of consciousness but this is rarely clearly evident. How far this condition is similar to or identical with the medical condition kinetic Autism in which lesions in the Lien cephalon and upper brainstem are present is unclear. Locked-in syndrome is a variety of kinetic Autism.

Stupor reportedly occurs in schizophrenia as part of catatonia, and in mood disorders in Eluding both depressive and manic phases. It may be surprising that mania, a condition that is usually conceived of as presenting with elevated mood, increased energy, and marked restlessness can also present in a stupor and in such cases it is usually characterized by psychomotor manifestations... as the prominent fea Cure: some patients lie [in bed] showing very severe inhibition for a long time.

Their limbs are cold; they refuse food, and every attempt to feed them is vain due to their opposition; for months they are mute. Only the facial expression, which shows no trace of depression and often shows a slight smile, reveals that a case is not typical circular [manic-depressive] stupor with depressed mood... Consider able retardation in their movements can be observed immediately: the gait is heavy and leaden; they hesitate to shake hands; and their writing is clearly slowed down.

In depressive stupor: The patient, usually, is confined to bed, is mute, inactive and un-cooperative. His bodily needs require attention in every way; he has to be fed, washed and bathed... On the surface it may seem as if there was a total absence of feeling or emotion, but that is more apparent than real, for, after recovery, many patients give a vivid account of the distress which they have experienced. The idea of death is believed by some to be almost universal.

Consciousness and its Disorders # Disorders of Attention To recapitulate, attention is designed to present to the mind, with clarity and vividness, an appropriate selection, only of some of the objects in our environment, where there are several, simultaneous possible objects. It includes the capacity to focus, sustain, Risen age, and shift attention. There is a passive and an active element to attention, the for mer controlled in a bottom-up approach by external stimuli and the latter controlled in a top-down approach by the individual’s goals or expectations. There is also an attentional capacity, which is the extent of the inherent or intrinsic processing capacity of the Batten tonal system. A full description of the current cognitive neuroscience model of attention is outside of the scope of this chapter.

There is little doubt that there are attentional problems, demonstrable on formal cogni Dive neuropsychological testing, associated with psychiatric disorders. Thus, impairments of attention and/or working memory are demonstrable in diverse conditions such as gen realized anxiety disorder, depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and organ ic brain disorders such as delirium and dementia. Attentional disturbance is a core aspect of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

(p. 425) Subjective accounts of abnormal attention are at their most rich and detailed in the seminal studies of McGhie and Chapman (1961 ). In Chapman’s later paper he gave several examples of problems with attention: I can’t shut things out of my mind and everything closes in on me. It stops me thinking and then the mind goes blank and everything gets switched off. I can’t pick things up to memorize because I am so absorbing everything around me and take in too much so that I can’t retain for any length of time—only a few seconds, and I can’t do simple habits like walking or cleaning my teeth. I have to use all my mind to do these things... (case 10).

At times there is nothing to hold the mind and this is when I go into a trance (case 15).

It happens when I’m watching the television as well and my concentration drifts away and focuses on any point in the room and I can’t pick anything up that is go ing on. I go into a daze because I can’t concentrate long enough to keep up the conversation and something lifts up inside my head and puts me into a trance...

(case 12).

Nothing settles in my mind—not even for a second. It just comes in and then it’s out. My mind goes away—too many things come into my head at once and I lose control. I get afraid of walking when this happens. My feet just walk away from me and I’ve no control over myself... (case 29).

These subjective descriptions draw attention to a number of cognitive difficulties include ing problems with focusing attention, of disengaging from environmental cues, of select Consciousness and its Disorders ing from a range of possible cues in the environment and thereby feeling overwhelmed by information. The difficulties described above have now been incorporated into the notion of Basic Symptoms that are conceived as subtle subclinical disturbances in mental processes that are the most direct expressions of the underlying neurobiological aberra sons of psychosis. These are disparate difficulties and prob bly reflect distinct neural underpinnings. The most distinct subjective description refers to being overwhelmed by information. This speaks to Broadbent’s theory in which he proposed a sensory buffer which allows only certain sensory data to pass through a filter for later processing and that this filter prevents overloading of the limited capacity mechanism beyond the filter. McGhie and Chapman’s own view is ex pressed as follows: Now let us suppose that there is a breakdown in this selective-inhibitory function of attention. Consciousness would be flooded with an undifferentiated mass of in coming sensory data, transmitted from the environment via the sense organs. To this involuntary tide of impressions there would be added the diverse internal im ages, and their associations, which would no longer be coordinated with incoming information. Perception would revert to the passive and involuntary assimilative process of early childhood and, if the incoming flood were to carry on unchecked, it would gradually sweep away the stable constructs of a former reality.

John Cutting interprets these accounts differently. He made the point that the patients had heightened attention rather than that the proposed sensory buffer was unable to streamline what information was available for processing. Furthermore, Cutting used the term “lures” to describe features of the environment that seemed to cap Cure the attention of patients with schizophrenia in such a manner that they were unable to disengage their attention. In cognitive neuroscience terms, this implies an impairment of passive attention as well as problems with disengaging and shifting attention.

(p. 426) In mood disorders, Cutting makes the case that patients are as prone to “lures” as they are in schizophrenia, the difference being that rather than objects, it is people who are the “lures” in mood disorders. The subjective description to support this view is drawn from Minkowski (1970: 329).

I feel that, when you insist, I ought to submit to your will and do what you demand of me. It irritates me to be someone’s fool, but I am incapable of resisting; I feel that you have control of me. I don’t dare do anything unless you ask me to. I do everything unconsciously. If you insist that I go out, I will go out. I can’t resist any more. It is atrocious! After dinner, when the others get up from the table, I get up automatically, carried along by their movements. I am the reflection of others. In sum, I vibrate with people, I reflect their movements; it is their vibrations that make me vibrate myself.

Consciousness and its Disorders Minkowski classifies this as an example of the influence of events, words, and people on patients in depressive states. I am uncertain that this is an example of passive attention, namely of what Cutting terms “lures.” Nonetheless, it is incontrovertible that depressed mood is associated with gloomy thoughts, memories of past morbid incidents to such a degree that there is marked impairment of concentration and attention. This suggests that both active and passive attention may be “lured” by negative aspects of the patient’s inner world.

Disorders of Awareness There are a number of neuropsychiatric conditions that illustrate the relationship be tween disorders of attention and impaired conscious awareness of objects. These conj sons are complex and are not completely understood. They include unilateral neglect; anosodiaphoria (lack of concern about hemiparesis); defective appreciation of hemipare sis with rationalization; denial of hemiparesis; and unawareness of hemiparesis (anosog nosia).

In their seminal paper, Paterson and Zangwill (1944 ) described unilateral neglect in a pre Piously healthy male who suffered a penetrating injury of the right parietal occipital re ion following an explosion in 1943. He lost consciousness for two or three minutes and showed minimal post-traumatic and retrograde amnesia. On recovery his most significant deficit was a strong neglect of the left side of space. He collided with objects on his left and left food on the left side of his dish. It was concluded that the lesion was on the upper borders of the supramarginal and angular Cyrus on the right side.

The aim in this section is not to examine in detail the varying hypotheses and findings re Carding these disorders of conscious awareness but to draw out the fact that syndromes of unawareness exist and that these syndromes make clear that consciousness involves attentional systems and that these systems require intact brain function in particular hemispheres and regions. These conditions in which individuals demonstrate a degree of unawareness or denial of hemiplegia have been recognized for well over a century by, amongst others, Babinski, Lhermitte, and Critchley.

Suss and Benson described a classic case of denial of hemiplegia.

A 62-year old man suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage. A right middle cerebral artery was demonstrated and successfully ligated, but the patient awoke with left hemiplegia. At first he (p. 427) vehemently denied the hemiplegia. At this time he was disoriented and had a retrograde amnesia covering at least 2 years prior to the surgery. When evaluated early one morning about 2 weeks post-operatively, he spontaneously described his paralysis, was oriented to both time and place, but had no memory of his cranial surgery.

In another case they described the extent to which individuals with anosognosia will go to deny their disability.

Consciousness and its Disorders A 57-year old hypertensive man sustained an acute intracerebral hemorrhage in Solving the right putamen. On admission to hospital he was stuporous with pro found left hemiplegia, left hemisensory loss, and left hemianopsia... He was dis oriented for time and place, could not remember his doctors’ names, and actively denied any physical disability. When asked if he could walk or dance, he would im mediately say yes; when asked to raise his arms or legs, he would raise the right limbs and insist that both arms or legs had been raised. When his hemiplegia was demonstrated to him he would accept the obvious fact and repeat the examiner’s statement concerning the cause of his disability but within minutes, if asked whether he had any disability, he would adamantly deny disability.

These accounts of unilateral neglect and anosognosia emphasize the fact that conscious Bess has neural underpinning and that attention to both right and left visual fields, is probably controlled by the right hemisphere whereas the dominant hemisphere (the left hemisphere in right-handed individuals) only oversees the contralateral visual fields. Hence damage to the dominant hemisphere is not followed by unilateral neglect or anosognosia since the right hemisphere continues to monitor sensory information from all fields. Damage to the right hemisphere on the other hand is accompanied by hemineglect and anosognosia for the left visual field. But, these matters also pertain not merely to vi Dual fields to also to how our bodies are experienced. This is made most manifest in a case that presented following embolism of the right cerebral artery reported by Critchley.

[I]t felt as if I was missing one side of my body (the left), but it also felt as if the dummy side was lined with a piece of iron so heavy that I could not move... I even fancied my head to be narrow, but the left side from the center felt heavy, as if filled with bricks.

The example of blindsight highlights a different understanding of the nature of conscious Bess. Cortical blindness occurs when the posterior cerebral arteries, which supply the vi Dual cortex are occluded. Bilateral occlusion produces total blindness but several studies since the early reports by Riddoch have shown that patients with this condition can “see” in their blind visual fields. The intriguing fact is that these patients are not aware of their capacity to “see”; in other words they are not consciously aware of having seen anything. Individuals with blindsight can detect simple patterns, the presence and direction of motion, and can detect and discriminate wavelength. However, the subjects are not aware of having seen anything. From the investigation of these subjects Zeke (1993 ) concluded that the “integrity of the visual cortex is necessary for the conscious experience of vision.” Exploration of the neural basis of blindsight forces the conclusion that there are different kinds of awareness. Young, for example, makes the case for phe nominal awareness, access awareness, monitoring, and executive awareness. He argued that: (p. 428)

Consciousness and its Disorders We might have expected that the existence of a unitary conscious mechanism would predict that all impairments would simultaneously compromise phenomenal awareness, access awareness, and monitoring to equivalent extents. Instead, one has to wonder whether the subjective unity of conscious phenomena is not largely illusory. Even if there were multiple conscious mechanisms, why should they not feel unified in operation? What else could they feel like?

Young is arguing that our subjective sense of the unity of conscious experience is not an implacable obstacle to the possibility of different neural mechanisms underlying different forms of conscious awareness. But, more crucially, impairment of consciousness can oc cur without our explicit knowledge of it, and with other areas of cognitive function being spared. These empirical facts pose serious challenges to how consciousness is construed in radical phenomenological analysis.

Conclusions Consciousness is a pivotal aspect of Husserl’s phenomenology. Indeed, it could be argued that it is consciousness that reveals to our inquiry all the subjective contents of expert Once. In this regard it is presupposed in any analysis of the total state of the psyche. Nonetheless, when psychic life takes place in the context of impairment of consciousness it makes the subjective experience inaccessible for phenomenological analysis. It is in editable that in these situations we come to rely more on observations and analysis of fragments of information that are divulged to us.

There is an obvious dimensional variation in the clarity of conscious awareness ranging from full alertness to coma and there are also significant qualitative changes associated with delirium that consist of more than alteration in conscious awareness but include changes in levels of activity, impairment in acts of consciousness such as perception and memory, and significant changes in the symbolic contents of consciousness. The role of attention in consciousness is complex but important. Attention and its disorders demon state that consciousness too is unlikely to be singular in nature but is probably a com polite of differing elements that are unified in subjective experience. PAGE_BREAK The chapter first introduces a phenomenological concept of temporality, referring to time as pre-reflectively lived vs. consciously experienced. Lived time is based on the constitu Dive synthesis of inner time consciousness on the one hand, and on the conative-Effective dynamics of life on the other hand. Experienced time, for its part, results from an inter Eruption and desynchronisation of lived time. It unfolds into the dimensions of present, past and future, leading to autobiographical time and finally to narrative identity. On this basis, major psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, melancholic depression and ob sessive-compulsive disorder will be presented as paradigm cases for a psychopathology of temporality.

Keywords: temporality, inner time consciousness, conative-Effective dynamics, lived time, autobiographical time, narrative identity, schizophrenia, melancholic depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, desynchronization # Introduction SINCE Minkowski (1933/1970), von Gebsattel, Straps, and Tellenbach, temporality has been a major subject of phenomenological psychiatry. Drawing on philosophical concepts of Bergson, Husserl, and Heidegger, these authors have analyzed psychopathological deviations of time-experience mainly from an individual point of view, for example, as a slowing-down or inhibition of lived time in depression or obsessive-com pulsive disorder. Their analyses are still highly valuable today, but may be carried further by introducing concepts such as embodied and intersubjective temporality into psy chopathology. The following overview introduces some conceptual distinctions that are important for analyzing disturbances of temporality in psychopathological conditions (cf. Table 48.1). On this basis, major psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, melancholic depression, and obsessive-compulsive disorder will be presented as paradigm cases for a psychopathology of temporality.

The Experience of Time and its Disorders # Implicit and Explicit Temporality To begin with, I will introduce the distinction between implicit and explicit temporality, or in other words, between time as pre-reflectively lived and time as consciously or reflex Lively experienced (see also Table 48.1).

Implicit Time Implicit or lived time means to experience the movement of life without awareness of the time passing, usually while being absorbed in some activity and oriented toward one’s (p. 432) immediate goals. Implicit temporality thus constitutes the always present under current of our experience. This undercurrent requires two conditions: The first condition relates to the continuity of pre-reflective awareness. Husserl famously argued that this continuity of “inner time-consciousness” is not a sequence of single instants but is based on the transcendental synthesis of three moments: presentation, retention, and protection (Husserl 2012: 44). Presentation consists of the “primal impression” as the experience given at each moment. Retention means remaining aware of what has just been experienced even as it slips away. Protection is the open anticipation of experiences yet to come—the sense of imminence. Speech is a good illustration of this: we hear the currently spoken words (presentation), but are also aware of the words we have just heard (retention) and anticipate certain words to come next (protection). This enables us to listen to and understand the sen Fence as a whole. Retention and protection may not be confounded with recollection and expectation, for they are an intimate part of the experienced present. Taken to ether, the three moments can also be referred to as the “width of presence” or the “duration block” ( Zahavi 2008: 56).

The second condition for implicit temporality is less related to a cognitive process than to a dynamic and Effective dimension of lived time. It can be captured by concepts such as drive, striving, urge, or affection. This second condition thus concerns the Effective-conative aspect of temporality, or in short, Donation (from Latin conatio = striving, seeking). It functions as the root for spontane ity, Effective directedness, attention, and the pursuit of goals that are key aspects of psychic life. The importance of the conative momentum for the experience of tempo Orality is clearly demonstrated when changes occur in basic motivational states, for example, in mania and depression: both severely affect the patients’ sense of time, on the one hand in the direction of acceleration, on the other as a retardation (see below).

The Experience of Time and its Disorders Table 48. Forms and dimensions of temporality Form Dimensions and aspects Implicit tempo Retention / presentation / protection Orality Donation (drive, striving, affection) Intersubjectivity: bodily resonance, inter corporeality Bodily temporal Bodily protentionality or potentiality; “intel ity tonal arc” Body memory Explicit tempo Past—present—future Orality Temporal emotions: sadness, guilt versus hope, longing, etc.

Intersubjectivity: synchronization—desynchro nization Biographical Autobiographical/narrative self-coherence temporality Existential tem Thrownness—project orality Awareness of finitude Seeking for meaning (p. 433) The implicit dimension of temporality may also be related to the lived body, for it is essentially opened up by its protections, potentialities, and capacities. Drawing on Mer lo-Monty’s notion of the “intentional arc,” as the bodily mediated directedness of our at Mention and activity toward its goal, we may say that this arc is based on both aspects of implicit temporality: on the cognitive component of the temporal synthesis or continuity, and on the Effective-conative tension necessary to perform an act or pursue a goal. More over, it is mainly through our acquired bodily skills and habits that we usually pursue our goals and perform our actions as familiar temporal sequences; lived temporality is thus crucially based on what may be termed body memory. In sum, implicit time may be regarded as the manifestation of the continuous, teleology cal, and intentional processes of life: “Lived time is connected with the experience of the embodied human subject as being driven and directed towards the world in terms of Jodi ly potentiality and capability” ( Wellie 2006: 173).

The Experience of Time and its Disorders Explicit Time We do not only experience temporality pre-reflectively, however. Often we become very explicitly aware of time, for example, when coming too late to a meeting, when awaiting a long wished-for holiday, or when we contemplate the memories of a past loved one. A gap then arises between plan and execution, desire and fulfillment, or presence and loss. If the gap occurs between the present and the past, we experience a seg Bent of time as “no longer,” and we feel time moving on relentlessly, while separating us from what we are missing. If we experience the gap between the present and the future, we are awaiting the “not yet” or “yet-to-come.” Both in missing a lost object and in await ing the future, we experience temporality as segmented and partly separated from the present. We are no longer immersed in our activities, and there is a sense in which time even seems to negate implicit or lived time. This becoming-explicit of time may also entail its apprehension as an independent and inexorable power that dominates us (Fuchs 2013: 80).

Explicit time is constituted by the three components of past, present, and future. These are experienced as closely bound up with certain time-specific emotions: the “now” with surprise, astonishment, or shock; the “no longer” with regret, grief, or remorse; the “not yet” with desire, impatience, yearning, or hope. Like retention, presentation, and proven son, the dimensions of past, present, and future require some form of synthesis. Here, however, we are no longer dealing with a passive or automatic process on the transcend dental level, but with an active synthesis by the subject. It is the personal, extended, or narrative self that binds the three parts together, namely through constantly creating and modifying a more or less coherent autobiographical story. The personal self is thus Napa ble both of appropriating its lived life as a narrative entity and of projecting itself into the future, on the basis of what the person has experienced to date.

The personal self may thus be regarded, in Heidegger’s terminology, as a dialectic unity of “thrownness” ( Geworfenheit ) and “project” (Entwurf), or as a “thrown project” (gewor finer Entwurf). It fulfills itself in time— indeed, “the living of time and the fulfillment of the self are two aspects of the same process” ( Theunissen 1991: 305). By actively living time and leading our life, we realize or “temporalize” ourselves. Awareness of one’s mortality is a crucial aspect of this existential temporality, for the urge or need to develop overarm sing projects and (p. 434) to seek for a meaningful coherence of our experiences, deeds, and goals ultimately emerges from the anticipation of death, that means, from the ire trievability and the finiteness of explicit time.

Intersubjective Temporality After distinguishing implicit and explicit temporality, we now turn to their intersubjective dimension. For this, we have to conceive of time as a relational order of processes which resonate or in other ways interact with one another. On the implicit level, we find that so Dial interactions are basically characterized by intercorporeality, that means, an ongoing The Experience of Time and its Disorders attunement of bodily and emotional communication, or an interbodily resonance. From early childhood on, the microdynamics of daily interaction entail an unconscious synchronization of movements, gestures, and expressions that is part of the implicit “social sense”. This implies a tacit sense of being temporally connected with others, which Minkowski (1933/1970 ) has called “lived synchronism”; one could also speak of a basal contemporality.

As a rule, we are hardly aware of this basal synchronism. On an explicit level, however, intersubjective time manifests in the various forms of social coordination or “timing” where synchronicity tends to be established deliberately and by convention: through daily and weekly routines, calendars, time scheduling, appointments, etc. This temporal coordi nation with others does not remain constant, however, but repeatedly passes through phases of desynchronization, of which we may distinguish two kinds: a state of being “too late” and of being “too early” in relation to external social processes. In other words, we may experience a synchronicity, a retardation, or an acceleration of our own time as against the intersubjective or “world time” (Figure 48.1).

Intersubjective synchronicity or the experience of a shared “ now ” is constituted through the presence of the other and through our shared referral to the world, as in joint Batten son or joint action. Presence in the full sense always means the actual or imagined pres Once of others. It can also be made explicit by using indexical words such as “here,” “now,” “today,” etc. Thus, the word “today” inserts the pre-reflectively shared situation into an explicit and external order of time: “today” means the world-day shared by all of us, and thus entails an alignment of implicit time with the world time. This is the basis of all explicit forms of temporal coordination.

En el document/libro hay una tabla/figure/esquema que se Suede resumir Como Figure 48. Synchronization and desynchronization of one’s own and world time.

(p. 435) On the other hand, the “ too early ” or the acceleration of one’s own time with re Aspect to external processes, makes waiting necessary, thus imposing on us a slower time structure to which we can respond with patience or impatience. Boredom also highlights unpleasantly the discrepancy between one’s own drive or interest and the lack of external stimulation or possibilities for action. Restlessness and agitation as a further acceleration of one’s own time can develop into manic excitement in pathological cases. Here the individual’s time gets more or less decoupled from natural and social rhythms.

The Experience of Time and its Disorders In contrast, the “ too late ” or the retardation of one’s own time is usually experienced as more unpleasant. As a counterpart to waiting, there first arises the time pressure, which results from having to catch up on a delay. Other experiences of backlog may be more painful: illness, for example, means a deceleration, a loss of ability to act, and thus a par ital exclusion from the life of others. Grief reflects a break which has been experienced in one’s synchronicity with others—the mourner cannot disengage from the shared past, whereas the social time keeps moving on. Guilt also has a retarding strum Cure as its sufferer holds fast to omissions of the past. Finally, a more or less marked de synchronization from intersubjective time is characteristic of severe depression.

To summarize: Intersubjective time can be considered a relational arrangement of Hindi visual and social processes which are characterized by synchronizations and desynchro nizations. While lived or implicit time is basically associated with synchrony, the expert Once of explicit time arises particularly in desynchronized states: as the “too early” or “too late,” and thus as time which “creeps” or “rushes,” which “flies” or against which one is fighting. The irreversibility and dominance of time is experienced first and fore most in discrepancies or separations from others to whom our lived time is attuned. Time which faces us from outside in seeming independence is in fact experienced primarily in relationships with others—that is, in desynchronizations of intersubjective time.

Psychopathology of Temporality On this basis, major psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, melancholic depression, and obsessive-compulsive disorder will briefly be presented as paradigm cases for a psy chopathology of temporality.

Schizophrenia

In schizophrenia, major symptoms such as thought disorder, thought insertion, or passive ty experiences may be explained by a weakening of the synthesis of inner time-conscious Bess (Gallagher 2000; Fuchs 2000b: 144f., 2013; Mishara 2007; Vogeley and Kupke 2007). The transition from simple disturbances of attention or speech to thought blockages and interference, and finally to inserted thoughts, cannot be explained as mere concentra son deficits at the level of semantic connections. Rather, the disturbance must be localized at the transcendental level where the temporal coherence of conscious Bess as such is constituted. The disturbance of temporal continuity on this level—certain 1 ly correlated to (p. 436) neurophysiological dysfunctions —then leads to a fragmentation of the intentional arc and an intrusion of unfitting thoughts or impulses into awareness. In speaking, for example, the patients may no longer be able to span the intentional arc of a meaningful sentence; speech becomes incoherent, or they have to use single words to explicitly “build up” the sentence. The single elements of thought, perception, or action then become disconnected fragments, which may even appear to the patient as alienated or opaque phenomena.

The Experience of Time and its Disorders The fragmentation of inner time-consciousness implies not only a weakening of the intel tonal arc, but also a failure of the inhibition of inappropriate thoughts or movements. Ap pairing “out of the blue,” so to speak, they can only be experienced in the retentional mode, which means that they will appear to the patient as a surprise or with a “transcend dental delay”. As a result, they lose their sense of Fineness and are expert Inced as alien elements intruding into the patient’s stream of consciousness, finally ap pairing as thought insertions, voices or “made” movements (passivity experiences). Thus, the disintegration of the intentional arc and the fragmentation of self-coherence entails an externalization of the remaining fragments, resulting in the typical first-rank sump toms of schizophrenia.

Finally, delusions may also be related to the disturbance of temporality. The basic disinter ration of inner time-consciousness leads, as we have seen, to fragmented thoughts, sen Cations, or movements that are not immediately experienced as one’s own. These frag Bents of the broken intentional arc may be in a sense re-temporalized on the explicit lev el, namely by integrating them in a delusional narrative. The patient now experiences “others” as influencing him, moving his limbs, inserting thoughts into his head. Although these delusional explanations might lessen the burden of the temporal self-disintegration, they come at the price of an increased disconnection from the temporality shared with others. For the deluded patient, there is no open intersubjectivity any longer, because the delusion has always already determined what others could possibly mean or intend. The loss of the patient’s ability to shift between different perspectives excludes all other pos sibilities of interpretation. The frozen, idiosyncratic reality of the delusion thus arrests the course of explicit or biographical time in order to compensate for the fragmentation of lived time.

In sum, from a phenomenological point of view, key schizophrenic symptoms may be de Ascribed as disturbances of the transcendental constitution of the “inner time-conscious Bess” or of lived time. The fragmentation of the normally continuous implicit flow of time is also what Stanghellini et al. (2016 ) have found in their research on altered time-expert Once in schizophrenia. This disturbance manifests itself in disorders of thought and Batten son, a disintegration of intentional acts, a fragmentation of basic self-coherence, and, in acute psychosis, in an externalization of the fragments in the form of first-rank 2 symptoms.

(p. 437) Effective Disorders If we compare this analysis with the alterations of temporality in Effective disorders, we find quite a different picture: Both in depression and mania, the synthesis and continuity of inner time-consciousness always remains intact. What is either lacking or exaggerated instead are the conative dynamics, and thus the Effective tension that carries the intel tonal arc forward. In contrast to the fragmentation of lived time in schizophrenia, affect Dive disorders therefore show a retardation or an acceleration of lived time, subjectively The Experience of Time and its Disorders experienced as time “slowing down” or “speeding up” (cf. Fuchs 2013 and chapter XX, this volume).

This difference has also been confirmed in comparative studies by Stanghellini et al.. Thus, for example, the schizophrenic blockade and incoherence of thought is fundamentally different from the inhibition and retardation of thinking found in severe depression. This illustrates again the difference between the transcendental synthesis and conative dynamics of lived time: The first signifies the temporal sequencing and structuring of the flow of consciousness, whose disturbances are manifested in cognitive symptoms. The second means the Effective or vital dynamics of the flow, which may be al treed in terms of drive, goal-directedness, and velocity. In experimental tests of time rat Dings, depressives’ experience of time was repeatedly demonstrated to be slowed down, whereas manic patients showed a seeded-up temporality (Lech 1975; Kitamura and Ku mar 1982; Münzel et al. 1988; Mundt et al. 1998; Bschor et al. 2004).

The disturbance of temporality in depression is twofold: On the one hand, there is a loss of drive, appetite, libido, interest, and attention, that means, a reduction of the conativeaffective dynamics, leading to psychomotor inhibition and to a slowing-down of lived time. This is also expressed in an increasing rigidity and reification of the lived body, in bodily heaviness, exhaustion, oppression, and general anxiety. On the other hand, this is connected with a loss of intersubjective synchronicity: depressive patients lack the bodily resonance of emotions that is necessary for intercorporeality. The resulting lack of expressive communication is felt by others as an irritating failure of at tenement. The patients themselves feel the painful incapacity to empathize with other people, to be addressed or affected by them. Hence, the failure of conative-Effective dy namics is accompanied by a loss of basal contemporality or a social desynchronization.

A more detailed analysis of temporality in Effective disorders will be given in chapter XX.

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Obsessive-compulsive disorders (obsessive-compulsive disorder) may be conceived as disturbances of the implicit time of pre-reflective, spontaneous becoming which normally underlies the enactments of life. Implicit time, as we have seen, enables the performance of intentional arcs of per caving and acting as well as the transition to new arcs of action which need not be deli Irately “set in motion” each time. In obsessive-compulsive disorder, however, the flow of intentional arcs is inhibit ed, and a pathological explication of the implicit arises: For example, the morning toilet and dressing consists of an endless sequence of single actions painstaking ly registered and set apart from each other; the housework must be worked through in accordance with a detailed item list; the act of closing the door must be repeated several times in a determined way, etc.

(p. 438) The temporality of obsessive-compulsive disorder is thus characterized by an inhibition or hold-up of lived time which instead of continually flowing is made into an explicit sequencing, or rather, a stuttering. The patients are unable to abandon themselves to the stream of becoming and The Experience of Time and its Disorders instead try to monitor and control their life in a hyperreflexive manner. Two components of the temporal disturbance may be distinguished: First, we find in obsessive-compulsive disorder patients an overall attempt to inhibit the passage of time as the power of change. For any change is experienced as a potential threat or harm, as a contamination, loss, decay, or obliteration. Thus, hesitation, indecisiveness, pro crastination, or hoarding are typical means to arrest the flow of time. Even more, checking, controlling, washing, or cleaning should alleviate the anxious apprehend ion of the future and the fear of an ever impending harm. The patients are Vesper Lately trying to preserve a pristine state of their belongings, their body, or their nevi ronment, in order to “freeze time,” as it were; for letting go would seem to surrender them to the unfathomable perils of life, and finally to death.

The second component is a characteristic feeling of incompleteness or imperfect son, a tormenting sense that one’s actions or experiences are not “just right” and therefore have to be repeated endlessly, which underlies many symptoms in obsessive-compulsive disorder.

First described by Janet as “ sentiment d’incompléDude,” later by Straps (1948/1987) and von Gebsattel (1954: 128ff.), it has recently been investigated in more detail in the context of psychotherapeutic approaches. Explanations in terms of a sensory-Effective dysfunction with a possible euro physiological origin have also been proposed (Subirà et al. 2015).

From a phenomenological point of view, however, the sense of completeness may not just be localized merely at the end of a sequence. Rather, it means the fulfillment of an overarm sing temporal gestalt, namely the intentional arc as a whole, which is experienced inch rally at the end. If this holistic gestalt is dissolved into single elements, which are only effected externally and bit by bit, then the individual may well monitor his actions meticu loudly; nevertheless, the unity of action is lost, and a feeling of fulfillment cannot ensue. Since the patient is not really involved in his own actions, they appear at the end as if “not done.”

Importantly, the pathological explication or dissolution of lived time in obsessive-compulsive disorder is not the re ult of a cognitive incoherence as in schizophrenia (in obsessive-compulsive disorder, there are no “gaps” in the stream of consciousness). Rather it arises from an inhibition caused by the patient’s vain attempt to avoid the threatening passage of time and to alleviate the anxiety connected with its progress. In order to arrive at a controlled progression and termination of actions nevertheless, patients frequently try to establish counting rituals. Numbers divide the qualitative lived time in homogeneous quantitative units that may then be executed or re Heated in a seemingly rational manner (brushing one’s teeth for twelve minutes, check the light twenty times, etc.). However, the sequence of numbers also means a “bad infinity” (Hegel) which in the long run is not capable of restraining the constant urge for security. Usually, the number of repetitions or the length of an action must continuously be raised. The result is the well-known phenomenon of being desperately stuck in a reset itive present like in a hamster wheel, leaving the patient no exit to an open future.

The Experience of Time and its Disorders # (p. 439) Conclusion This chapter has introduced some general concepts of temporality which are suitable for analyzing disturbances of temporalization in psychiatric disorders. The distinction of lived and experienced, or implicit and explicit time allows to understand and explain symptoms of major disorders, for example, as a fragmentation or a retardation of lived time, or as a pathological explication of normally implicit components of the stream of consciousness. Moreover, the concepts of synchronization and desynchronization connect the analysis of time with intersubjectivity, that means, with the social origins as well as the social Bani festations of mental illness.

Three examples of an application of these concepts were presented: Central symptoms of schizophrenia such as thought disorder, thought insertion, or passivity experiences may be regarded as manifesting a disturbance of inner time-consciousness. Major depression, on the other hand, may be conceived as an inhibition of the conative-Effective dynamics of life which leads to a desynchronization from intersubjective time. Finally, in obsessivecompulsive disorder the flow of lived time is inhibited and dissolved into repetitive ele Bents in order to alleviate the anxious apprehension of the future and the tormenting feeling of incompleteness. However, through avoiding the future, the obsessive patient gets stuck in a present that is completely determined by the past, as an “eternal recur Fence of the same.” These examples should suffice to point out that a comprehensive psy chopathology of temporality is both a major desideratum and a promising project for the future.

Gallagher S.. “Self-reference and Schizophrenia: A Cognitive Model of Immunity to Error through Misidentification.” In D. Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self: Philosophical and Psychopathological Perspectives on Self-experience, pp. 203–239. Amsterdam, Philadel phi: John Benjamin.

Gebsattel E. von.. Prolegomena Diner medizinischen Anthropologie. Berlin, Götin gen, Heidelberg: Stringer.

Husserl E.. Cartesianische Meditationen. Hamburg: Felix Seiner Verlag.

Kitamura T. and Kumar R.. “Time Passes Slowly for Patients with Depressive State.” Alta Psychiatric Scandinavia 65: 415–420.

Minkowski E.. Le temps vécu. Etudes phénoménologiques et psychopathologiques. Paris: Press Universitaires de France; Eng. trans. N. Metzel. Lived Time. Phenomenology cal and Psychopathological Studies. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1970.

The Experience of Time and its Disorders Mishara A. L.. “Missing Links in Phenomenological Clinical Neuroscience: Why We Are Not There Yet.” Current Opinions in Psychiatry 20: 559–569.

Mundt C., Richter P., van His H., and Stump T.. “Zeiterleben und Zeitschaetzung depressive Patienter.” Nervenarzt 69: 38–45.

Münzel K., Gender G., Steinberg R., and Faith L.. “Time Estimation of Depressive Patients: The Influence of the Interval Content.” European Archives of Psychiatric and Neurological Sciences 237: 171–178.

Pokropski M.. “Timing Together, Acting Together. Phenomenology of Intersubjec Dive Temporality and Social Cognition.” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 14: 897–909.

Ramseyer F. and Tschacher W.. “Synchrony: A Core Concept for a Constructivist Approach to Psychotherapy.” Constructivism in the Human Sciences 11: 150–171.

Radcliffe M.. “A Bad Case of the Flu? The Comparative Phenomenology of Depress ion and Somatic Illness.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 20: 198–218.

Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., Presenza S., Mancini M., Raballo A., Blase S., and Cutting J.. “Psychopathology of Lived Time: Abnormal Time Experience in Persons with Schizophrenia.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 42: 45–55.

Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., Presenza S., Mancini M., Northoff G., and Cutting J.. “Abnormal Time Experiences in Major Depression: An Empirical Qualitative Study.” Psy chopathology 50: 125–140.

(p. 441) Straps E. (1948/1987). On Obsession: A Clinical and Methodological Study. New York: Johnson Reprint Corp.

Straps E.. Phenomenological Psychology. New York: Basic Books.

Subirà M., Cato J. R., Alfonso P., do Rosario M. C., Legalàs C., Batistuzzo M. C., and Pujol J.. “Brain Structural Correlates of Sensory Phenomena in Patients with Obsessive- Compulsive Disorder.” Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience 40: 232.

Summerfeldt L. J.. “Understanding and Treating Incompleteness in Obsessive‐ Compulsive Disorder.” Journal of Clinical Psychology 60: 1155–1168.

Tellenbach H.. Melancholy. History of the Problem, Endogeneity, Typology, Patio genesis, Clinical Considerations. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

Theunissen M.. Negative Theologies der Zit. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Tschacher W., Bees G. M., and Ramseyer F.. “Nonverbal Synchrony and Affect in Dyadic Interactions.” Frontiers in Psychology 5: 1323.

The Experience of Time and its Disorders Vogeley K. and Kupke C.. “Disturbances of Time Consciousness from a Phenom nological and a Neuroscientific Perspective.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 33: 157–165.

Wellie M.. “Lived Time and Psychopathology.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 12:173–185.

Zahavi D.. Subjectivity and Selfhood. Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Notes:

1 ( ) There is increasing neuropsychological evidence of these disturbances of temporal in tegration. e.g. schizophrenia patients exhibit reduced attention spans, disturbances in planning, initiation, sequencing, and synchronization of speech as well as in the perform Dance of other activities.

2 ( ) Of course it should be added that basic disturbances of temporality may also affect the level of explicit time. Thus, the fragmented identity of the subject becomes dubious and uncertain, and the patient might wonder whether he still is the same person as he was before.

Thomas Fuchs Thomas Fuchs, MD, PhD, is a psychiatrist and philosopher, and Jasper Professor and head of the section ‘Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy’ at the Department of Psychiatry in Heidelberg, Chairman of the Section ‘Philosophical Foundations of Psychiatry’ of the German Psychiatric Association (DGPPN), and Fel low of the Marsilius-Kolleg (Center for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies) at the University of Heidelberg. His major research areas are phenomenological psy chopathology, psychology and psychotherapy; coherence and disorders of self-expert Once, phenomenology and cognitive neuroscience, and history and ethics of medicine and psychiatry.

Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders # Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders Julian C. Hughes The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Attention, concentration, memory, and their disorders cover a wide field of psychopathol ogy. It is important to see how central attention and concentration are to our mental lives and, therefore, to our being. Memory, in its many forms, is also pervasive in our lives. The disorders of these mental phenomena, therefore, affect us in multiple ways. This article starts by asserting that (and how) attention, concentration, and memory are closely tied to our sense of being the sort of beings that we are. But it moves on to survey the many disorders that result from disturbances in these psychic phenomena. These include obi ous conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease, delirium, dementia, depression, mania, and schizophrenia; and disorders as varied as transient global amnesia, semantic dementia, dissociative amnesia, Korsakov’s syndrome, and a raft of neurotic or stress-related conj sons. Hence, a variety of different psychiatric diseases share these common psychopath logical phenomena.

Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, attention, concentration, delirium, dementia, depression, mania, memory, schizo phrenia # Introduction CONSCIOUS living things attend and remember. Human beings are by nature self-con scions and typically we express our self-conscious awareness and reflection through lan gauge. Furthermore, language defines us as human beings. So the importance of Batten son, concentration, and memory is that these phenomena are closely tied to our sense of being the sort of beings that we are.

In this article I shall, first, define the terms as they have been described in texts of de scriptive psychopathology; and, secondly, before some concluding remarks, describe the disorders of attention, concentration, and memory as they occur in a variety of conj sons.

Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders # What are Attention and Concentration?

The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary defines attention as: The action, fact, or state of attending or giving heed; the mental faculty of attend ing, attentiveness; application of the mind, consideration, thought; and concentration as: The continued focusing of mental powers and faculties on a particular object.

Whilst the definition of “attention” seems in part tautological (attention is attending!), it is also the “application of the mind ”; and concentration—which is defined elsewhere as “attention sustained for some duration of time” ( Sims 1988: 30)—is similarly the continua ing focus of “ mental powers and faculties” (emphasis added).

(p. 443) Attention and concentration can be regarded as the means by which we, as mind ed individuals, interact with the world. They, like memory, are intentional mental states in the sense that they always imply an object: we attend to or concentrate on something. As is well known, it was Franz Brentano who introduced the notion of “intel tonality” back into contemporary thought from its use by scholastic thinkers in the Mid dle Ages. It was one way to characterize mental from physical phenomena. Mental phe novena take in and contain an object intentionally; but mental phenomena show intel tonal inexistence, because what is contained in the mental just is not physically present. It is of note that “attention” and “intentional” share the similar Latin root tender, which suggests stretching out, a directedness toward something. This is again to suggest the importance of these mental phenomena for our being-in-the-world. They are the means by which we give heed to the world in order to consider it. If they go wrong, then our grasp of the world is changed, distorted, or lessened.

Karl Jasper stated simply of attention, “This determines the clarity of our experience” ( Jasper 1997: 140). Earlier he wrote: “Normal people can concentrate on any task which is set them, but with alteration in the total psychic state, this capacity steadily decreases” ( Jasper 1997: 140). When Jasper referred to the “total psychic state,” he was thinking of “a total state of consciousness which makes it possible for Hindi visual phenomena to arise” ( Jasper 1997: 137). He went on to say: In psychic life, everything is connected with everything else and each element is colored by the state and context in which it occurs.... Each single element, every perception, image or feeling differs according to whether it occurs in a state of clear or clouded consciousness.

(Jasper 1997: 137)

Andrew Sims makes the same link between attention, concentration, and consciousness: Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders Attention is a different function from consciousness, but dependent upon it. Thus, variable degrees of attention are possible with full consciousness, but complete at Mention and concentration is impossible with diminished consciousness.

(Sims 1988: 30)

A distinction can be made between attention and awareness: Attention and awareness are not precisely distinguished, but attention refers to the objective observation of another person, object or event, whilst awareness is the subjective description of the state in which the precepts may be received.

(Sims 1988: 30)

Thus, there can be a background awareness of something going on, say in the street out side, but my attention is fixed on what is happening in the room, until suddenly the noise outside captures my attention. Sims also picks up Kräupl Taylor’s distinction between vig lance and absorption. One person may be too absorbed by what is happening inside to notice what is going on in the street; another, who is too vigilant, might not be able to concentrate on what is going on inside because of the slightest thing that occurs outside. According to Kräupl Taylor: When the reactivity of the mind is high, this is subjectively experienced as full, clear or lucid consciousness.... A lucid sensorium [or consciousness] is objective ly noticed as a state of alertness, attentiveness, or vigilance.

(Kräupl Taylor 1979: 215)

(p. 444)

So attention and concentration are important for how we see and relate to the world, are intimately connected to consciousness, but are fragile to those conditions that might af Sect consciousness.

What is Memory?

Memory is not one thing. A phenomenological account of memory, therefore, would in Elude many things. John Hodges (2007 ) has provided a useful overview of the major sub divisions of memory (see Figure 49.1).

The main division is between declarative (explicit) and procedural (implicit) memory. De clarative memory is “available to conscious access and reflection,” whereas procedural memory refers to learned responses which are not a matter of conscious reflection (Hodges 2007: 6).

Procedural memory is split into three types. Conditioning and priming are similar: one thing leads to another based on a type of memory. In the classical conditioning expert Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders Bents of Ivan Pavlov, a stimulus (such as a bell) leads to a response (dogs salivating). In tests of priming, the subject is asked to recall some words and a prompt is then used to elicit the correct answer, even though the original word has been forgotten. In the first case, the dog has remembered at some level that the bell signifies food. In the second case, the subject has forgotten the words at a conscious level, but the prompts are enough to encourage the right answer, so something was remembered. Day-to-day Croce Aural memory is easily understood in terms of motor skills such as driving and playing a musical instrument. These are (p. 445) things we can just do, once we have acquired the necessary skills, without reflection. I can remember how to drive without thinking about how to drive.

En el document/libro hay una tabla/figure/esquema que se Suede resumir Como Figure 49. The major subdivisions of memory.

Adapted from John R. Hodges, Cognitive Assessment for Clinicians, 2nd edn., 7, Figure 1. © 1994, Ox ford University Press. Reproduced by permission of Oxford University Press mic/product/cognitive-assessment-for-Blini sans-9780192629760?q= Cognitive%20Assessment%20for%20Clinicians&Bang =e n &cc=g b Declarative memory is split into short-term (or working) memory and long-term memory. Short-term memory is, strictly speaking, that part of the memory “responsible for the im mediate recall of small amounts of verbal... or spatial material” ( Hodges 2007: 8). It is the sort of memory involved in remembering a telephone number just long enough to use it. The material is then usually forgotten.

Long-term memory is split into episodic and semantic memory. Episodic memory is the memory of personal episodes, which are timeand context-specific: Auntie Bertha being stung by a bee on the beach in Bognor for instance. Semantic memory, on the other hand, does not depend on time or place, but is our store of knowledge. This includes our memo ry for the meaning of words (such as “bee” and “beach”) as well as our recall of factual information.

Another important distinction, which is relevant to clinical practice, is between antero grade and retrograde memory. Anterograde memory refers to new memories being formed; whilst retrograde memory refers to information learned previously. A person may Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders still be able to recall events and information from years ago, but not remember what has just happened.

So memory is not just one thing. The distinctions can be made even finer. There are dif ferences between recalling and recognizing; and differences between recalling words and recognizing faces and the other way around. Memory is a pervasive feature of our mental lives. As with problems affecting attention and concentration, disturbances of memory are likely to have profound effects on our psychic lives generally.

Disorders of Attention and Concentration Attention and concentration are affected by a great variety of disorders. Sims (1988: 31) lists organic states, such as “head injury; acute toxic confusional states... epilepsy; raised intracranial pressure; and brain stem lesions” as causing inattention, usually in conjunction with lowering of conscious level. Psychogenic states, such as dissociative am nesia, may also alter attention (Sims 1988: 31). In this section I shall give examples from just a sample of possible disorders.

Mania is characterized, as well as by elation, by distractibility, which is an inability to re Cain attention, so that something external quickly intrudes on the conversation and adds to the impression of flight of ideas. In addition, the person with mania or hypo-mania may well feel that those around are slow in their thoughts. The rapidity of thought, which fre quently combines with grandiose thinking, is also a sign of poor attention or contributes to it.

On the other hand, in depression, it can be hard for the person to keep up with others be cause the thinking of the depressed person feels slow.

Mrs. Jones believes she is suffering from dementia. She finds it difficult to concern rate on what is going on around her. She has been feeling very low for some time and is unable to maintain her interest in things, which she also feels must reflect her increasing dementia. But people tell her that she is depressed. In a test of her mental functioning, in which she felt she had done (p. 446) very badly, she was told that her memory was good, even though she forgot some words she was meant to remember and even though, when asked to spell a word backwards, she could not concentrate on the task and felt desperate about it.

The cognitive profile suggested in the case of Mrs. Jones is typical of depression, where tests that require concentration can seem too much for the person, despite other cogni Dive functions being maintained.

In delirium, an acute confusional state, it becomes difficult for the person to maintain at Mention or to shift attention in an appropriate manner. In part this links to the perceptual disturbances, such as illusions, and associated delusions which can develop. As in the Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders case of Mr. Stewart, in delirium there can be marked fluctuations in the person’s con scions level, which inevitably has an impact on attention and concentration.

Mr. Stewart was brought into hospital by his daughter. He had been feeling unwell for some time. He is now in a side room. He becomes sure that the doctors are poisoning him with the wrong medication because the clock on the wall keeps looking like a snake. He is also hearing noises which he thinks are the staff lining up outside his room to come in and kill him. When they do come in, they ask him all sorts of questions. But he cannot focus on them for more than a few seconds both because he is fearful about what the doctors intend to do and because he is distracted by the changing appearance of the clock.

Children with hyperkinetic disorders are overactive. But they also have marked inatten son, which is regarded as a central feature and has led to the term “attention deficit dis order.” The International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) comments: Impaired attention is manifested by prematurely breaking off from tasks and lav ing activities unfinished. The children change frequently from one activity to an other, seemingly losing interest in one task because they become diverted to an other...

(WHO 1992: 263)

In a variety of conditions, regarded as neurotic and stress-related, such as panic and gen realized anxiety, phobic disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, and obsessive-compel chive disorder, attention and concentration can be affected.

Since arriving in England, Adas Ahmad has suffered from flashbacks to his last few months in Syria, when frequent rocket attacks targeted his own and nearby villages. He remains hypervigilant, often feeling tense and on edge, his attention attracted by every loud noise or unusual movement in his vicinity. He sometimes forgets that he is now in a safe country and thinks he is back near Damascus. His concentration on the tasks he should be doing can be impaired.

Disorders of attention and concentration can also appear in schizophrenia and other psy chaotic states, in part because the person might be distracted by their psychotic expert Fences. Jasper describes “thought block” in schizophrenia as an interruption of concern ration: They suddenly cease to reply, stare in front, and do not seem to understand any thing. After a time (minutes or seconds) this ceases, only to recur again a little lat er.

(Jasper 1997: 142)

(p. 447) Increasingly, cognitive dysfunction is a recognized aspect of schizophrenia, not solely when it is chronic: Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders Impaired attention is considered a primary cognitive deficit in schizophrenia. Ind visuals who are genetically predisposed to schizophrenia have poor ability to maintain their attention even prior to the first psychotic episode.... By the time patients experience their first episode of psychosis, attentional impairments are typically present and of moderate severity...

As in a number of disorders, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder, anorexia nervosa, and autism, so too in schizophrenia, lack of cognitive flexibility as shown by difficulties in senor task-shifting can also be problematic for, and a manifestation of, problems in Batten son and concentration. Such executive dysfunction has general implications for the ways in which other cognitive functions are managed. We can see, therefore, that attention and concentration can be affected by a number of mental disorders and are manifestations of some of these disorders, with profound implications for the people concerned.

Disorders of Memory Confabulation “is a falsification of memory occurring in clear consciousness in associa son with an organically derived amnesia” ( Sims 1988: 44). This can occur in a variety of conditions, but is frequently associated with the Korsakov syndrome (dense amnesia, lack of insight, and confabulation), which in turn is associated with heavy drinking. It is caused by a lack of Vitamin B1, also known as thiamine. But Korsakov’s can be caused by a variety of organic conditions (e.g. tumors or strokes) that might affect the mammillary bodies or other regions of the brain associated with dense amnesia, such as the thalamus; and confabulation can occur in other pathologies as well. For instance, it can occur in de mentia, where there is a regrettable tendency to label confabulated beliefs as delusions, whereas they are merely the person’s attempt to account for a gap in memory.

Ms. Harbottle has dementia and lives in a care home. Every morning she puts on her glasses which sit on the bedside table. But increasingly they are not there when she awakens. She starts to think that someone else is coming into her room and moving them. It must be the staff in the home. When she complains, staff in evitably find her glasses elsewhere and give them back to her with the explanation that she must have put them down herself and forgotten. She objects to this, be cause she never recalls putting them elsewhere. Now she finds other things in un expected places, as if someone is constantly in her room moving objects. Again the staff tell her that she obviously forgets where she puts things.

Such experiences inevitably lead to paranoia and could be labeled as psychotic rather than as a memory problem, with unfortunate implications for treatment.

Kräupl Taylor described Mr. B., who in 1926 was overcome by carbon monoxide fumes and became unconscious. A week later he showed signs of the Korsakov syndrome: Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders He could not remember anything since the accident, was unable to retain new ex periences, and had difficulty in orienting himself in space and time.

(Kräupl Taylor 1979: 258–259)

(p. 448) Mr. B was paid a considerable disability pension. Controversy then arose about whether or not his symptoms were veridical. Thirty years later it was confirmed that mostly he had been shamming, even if the original disorder had a true organic basis. Olav er Sacks, too, presents an interesting account of his patient, Jimmie G., who had Korsakov’s, where “the memory traces were fugitive in the extreme, and were apt to be effaced within a minute, often less, especially if there were distracting or competing sim uli” (Sacks 1986: 26).

Transient global amnesia occurs in otherwise healthy people who are unable to remem ber new things for even a short while. After a few hours, things return to normal but the person is left with a dense memory deficit for the time of the attack.

Disturbances in memory also occur in delirium, but this is “largely secondary to dimin shed attention” ( Hodges 2007: 30). People with delirium will show confabulation too. When people recover from a delirium, say after an infection, they will usually have a dense amnesia for the time that they were ill, “although where fluctuation has been marked islands of memory may remain” ( Hodges 2007: 30).

Schizophrenia is also associated with poor memory. But memory dis orders are mostly associated with the dementia and can vary according to the type of dementia. Alzheimer’s disease shows a gradual onset of memory impair Bent, where this typically affects episodic memory early (whereas in dementia with Dewy bodies memory loss is seen slightly later), but Alzheimer’s still affects both semantic and procedural memory.

Mr. Chaudhry developed memory impairment some years ago. Initially he was seen in a memory clinic and was told that he had mild cognitive impairment. But later he was told that he had dementia. Although at first he would only forget things that had just happened, later it started to affect his use of language. He be came disoriented, forgetting the date and where he was living. At about this time, his family had to stop him from driving because he seemed to be losing the Feces chary skills. He then started to find it difficult to recognize the faces of his friends and family. As the dementia worsened, he lost other skills too, such as his ability to feed himself. In the more advanced stages of his Alzheimer’s disease, he forgot how to speak English and reverted to his native tongue. In the end he seemed to live in a small space of time, where he could only recall what had just happened.

Vascular dementia and stroke disease can cause more localized cognitive impairment, perhaps affecting the memory for words and language at an early point, rather than episodic memory. In semantic dementia too, which is one type of frontotemporal degener Cation, there is an early and prominent loss of the memory for words ( Hodges and Patter Attention, Concentration, Memory, and their Disorders son 2007 ). Memory disorders, therefore, like attention and concentration, suggest a Kari ety of possible pathologies and will cause a variety of subjective difficulties, from the em barrassment of word-finding problems to the tragedy of forgetting a loved one.

Conclusion Problems with attention, concentration, and memory occur in a great variety of conj sons. In this sense they contribute to trans-nosography, because several different psych attic diseases share these common psychopathological dimensions. Not infrequently there is a (p. 449) discrepancy between the person’s subjective experience of problems with attention, concentration and memory, and the objective reality. For instance, the per son with dementia might not recognize the extent of his deficits on objective testing; whereas the person with depression might ardently believe that she has dementia and is performing very badly on tests when in fact she is doing well. But depression can be pro dromal to dementia, so the observed cognitive deficits are both significant to the person and significant clinically as markers of a potentially unifying underlying pathology. And understanding the mismatch between objective symptoms and subjective experience in the person with dementia, who lacks insight into his condition, is important if we are to know how to communicate with and help him to live with dementia. Our ability to attend and to remember is vital to our standing because of our situated nature as beings who act on and interact with the world, which we do primarily as embodied agents.

Attention, concentration, and memory, therefore, are intimately connected to our stand ing as selves-in-the-world. When I cannot attend or concentrate sufficiently, my grasp on the world diminishes, which may or may not be pathological. When I cannot remember, my reality is circumscribed, which may or may not be a difficulty. The importance of these phenomena is their essential tendency to connect us to the world and to each other as minded individuals. PAGE_BREAK This chapter covers descriptive, psychological, linguistic, and neuropsychological ac counts of language. It then deals with extant phenomenological aspects of language. Fi ally the chapter tackles the contributions of the three fathers of phenomenology—Ed Fund Husserl, Max Schemer, and Martin Heidegger. The chief focus is on a set of facts about language disorder which undermine many of the philosophical formulations of lan gauge over the past century. What is most apparent is the fragility and perverseness of language under psychopathological conditions without much effect on the subject’s gen real behavior or even grasp of meaning. Subsidiary consideration is given to the Pele Dance of linguistic analysis of the main language disorders in psychopathology, and to the importance of experimental results as opposed to over-arching theories of the nature of language and its breakdown.

Keywords: language, phenomenology, Husserl, Schemer, Heidegger # Introduction DISORDERS of thought, speech, and language are prolific in psychotic and brain-dam aged subjects. Understanding of the topic has been blighted by inapt terminology, failure to appreciate that items in psychiatric and neurological lexicons often refer to the same entity, uncertainty about what constitutes thought or speech as opposed to language, and shifting psychological models during the twentieth century as to the nature of the mind. The most insightful contributions have been those of linguists and neuropsychologists. Phenomenological psychopathologists have largely shunned the topic. I shall nevertheless consider what phenomenological philosophy has to offer.

Thought, Speech, and Language Disorders # Descriptive Psychopathology The plethora of psychiatric and neurological terms are laid out in Table 50.. Speech dis orders are the simplest to categorize. Either there is a reduction (poverty of speech) or absence (anarthria, Autism); excess (logorrhoea, pressure of speech); or repetition (echolalia, if of others’ speech; stereotype, if of one’s own speech).

The three generic disorders of language are aphasia, non-aphasic misnaming, and some aspects of formal thought disorder. Aphasia has many subdivisions, but all are essentially breakdowns in the structural elements of language—its phonemes, syntax, and semantics. Non-aphasic misnaming, a term introduced by Weinstein and Hahn, is a disorder of the fourth element of language—its pragmatics, the way it is put to use. Neologisms (nondictionary words), paraphasias (actual words used wrongly), and stilted or out-of-focus phrases occur. Whereas aphasia results from damage within the Brock-Wernicke axis in the left hemisphere, non-aphasic misnaming accompanies a variety of focal lesions out side this region—frontal, right-hemispheric—as well as generalized dysfunction—deliri um, concussion. Some aspects of the umbrella term, formal thought disorder, are also dis turbances (p. 451) of pragmatic language, and are indistinguishable from the neologisms, paraphasias, and odd turns of phrase evident in non-aphasic misnaming. Others are the opposite of aphasia, and consist of a preoccupation with, elaboration of, the phonetics, grammar, and formal meaning of words.

Thought, Speech, and Language Disorders Table 50. Inventory of thought, speech, and language disorders Item Meaning of item Speech disorder absence of speech anarthria Autism poverty of speech reduced speech logorrhoea pressure of excess speech speech echolalia repetition of others’ speech stereotype of speech repetition of own speech Language disorder generic terms: aphasia phonemic, syntactic, and semantic breakdowns in language non-aphasic misnaming pragmatic breakdown in language formal thought disorder pragmatic breakdown in language; (some aspects) phonemic, syntactic, and semantic hy prevalence specific entities: neologism non-dictionary word paraphasia actual word used wrongly Thought disorder generic terms: formal thought disorder illogical, inconsequential, or imposer (some aspects) shed expression of thought specific entities: illogicality illogical expression of thought Thought, Speech, and Language Disorders poverty of content of impoverished thinking thought flight of ideas exuberant thinking derailment (tangentiality, inconsequential expression of thought knight’s move thinking, loss of goal, incoherence)

loss of dreaming absence of dreams loss of imagery absence of imagery Genuine thought disorder is apparent in yet other components of formal thought disorder, in the form of seemingly illogical, inconsequential, and impoverished ways of expressing some idea. A number of metaphors have been proposed in an attempt to portray this— tangentiality, derailment, knight’s move thinking, loss of goal, and incoherence. Andreasen’s (1979 ) investigation into all this demonstrated that raters were unreliable in distinguishing between these. A quantitative assessment of whether thoughts were im poverished (poverty of content of thought) or exuberant (flight of ideas) was more Deli able in Andreasen’s study. (p. 452) Other aspects of thinking—dreaming, imagery—can al so be impaired in psychopathological situations.

Nosological Specificity Despite the problematical nature of some of the supposed entities, there is a surprisingly strong link between some of them and specific diagnostic categories. Formal thought dis order, particularly poverty of content of thought, is highly indicative of schizophrenia. Autism, loss of dreaming, and loss of imagery are characteristic of depressive illness. Flight of ideas and pressure of speech, in combination, are virtually pathognomonic of mania. In delirium non-aphasic misnaming predominates. Of all the con Editions which commonly present to psychiatrists, dementia is the only one where aphasia appears.

Psychological Accounts Psychological approaches in the case of formal thought disorder have been of two main sorts. Either an intrinsic disturbance of language and thinking is denied, and the various manifestations attributed to non-specific motivational, emotional, or attentional factors. Or, an intrinsic problem is deemed genuine, but a single overarching explanation is of freed for all of them: for example, recrudescence of primitive, illogical thought patterns Thought, Speech, and Language Disorders, regression to childish ways of thinking, or loss of abstract attitude.

Each proposal has eventually been rebutted by experimental work. To give some exam Ales: Owen et al. showed that people with schizophrenia were more not less logical than normal controls on syllogisms, refuting two of the theses in one go—their superior performance a blow to any non-specific motivational impairment and questioning the very notion that they were illogical at all. Cameron found marked differences between six-year-Colds and schizophrenics in a reasoning test, undermining Vygotsky’s thesis. Shimkunas found schizophrenics to be more not less abstract, contra Goldstein.

Linguistic Analysis The proper analysis of language disorder is linguistics and this has considerably clarified the pot-pourri of abnormalities known as formal thought disorder, in itself and with re Aspect to aphasia and non-aphasic misnaming.

If we start with aphasia, which is the simplest of the three, the new words are composed of substitutions or deletions governed by rules intrinsic to normal language formation (p. 453) itself: phonemic transpositions between similarly articulated phonemes— p ears becoming b ears; syntactic changes in the direction of simplification— abandonment of articles, agreement markers, and auxiliary verbs—hence a telegrammat ic style; semantic anomalies are words with a similar lexical form but not primarily a similar sound or category membership—hence walk for walking but not sneeze for snooze or dog for cat.

In formal thought disorder the precise opposite occurs. Chaika observed: an inappropriate noting of phonological features, e.g. “I had a little goldfish too like a clown. Happy Halloween down”.

She also pointed out: preoccupation with too many of the semantic features of a word, e.g. “My mother’s name was Bill and Coo. St. Valentine’s Day is the official starting’ of the breeding season of the birds. All buzzards can coo”.

This is not the sort of speech encountered in aphasia, but rather a hyper-alertness to phonological and semantic cues. Their grammatical deviance too is quite unlike the par ing down of syntactical complexity seen in aphasia, but instead a profusion of suffixes and prefixes, as in these neologisms from my subjects: “talkable people” (talked a lot), “deep thoughtedness” (able to think deeply), and “hermatergised” (made into a hermit). Bleuler (1911/1950 ) had already noticed this: “bemillioned” (received millions), “enchambered by winter” (house-bound). I consider these to be “hyperphoneticism,” “hypergrammatism,” and “hypersemanticism” (to coin further neologisms, hopefully in the interests of sci Thought, Speech, and Language Disorders Once). To complicate matters, however, this hyperactivity in the first three components of language is coupled with pragmatic deviance.

Non-aphasic misnaming is pure pragmatic language disorder. The features, in Weinstein and Hahn’s account, are: “paraphasic misnaming,” for example, wheelchair called chaise Tongue; inappropriate reference to body in the third person, for example, disabled limb described as “He’s very Gimpy”; and “stilted, ornate and pedantic” phrases, for exam ple, when asked why he had gone to the doctor one patient replied, “lack of precision in dealing with my friends.”

We can now formulate the three entities as follows: aphasia is a breakdown in phonetics, syntax, and semantics; non-aphasic misnaming is a breakdown in the pragmatics of lan gauge; formal thought disorder is the most complex, as it is a combination of phonetic, syntactic, and semantic hyperactivity along with pragmatic language breakdown (and some further genuine anomalies of thinking).

Neuropsychological Contributions With an eye to our later phenomenological analysis we can abstract from the neuropsy chological literature two general principles about the nature of speech and language.

The first, uncovered by decades of work by Russian linguists and neurologists, and sum marized by Glezerman and Balkowski, is that any word plays a dual role in the scheme of things. Its core status in modern humans (in the left hemisphere) is as a ate gory, (p. 454) whose meaning depends on its contrast with other words rather than any faithful portrayal of a life experience—for example, a pond is not a river and not a lake rather than that collection of water in our home village. Its other role is as a sign for this very last sort of experience, a situation attested to in numerous accounts of primitive lan gauges. Per Cassirer: The Bakairi language—an idiom spoken by an Indian tribe in Central Brazil—has an individual name for each species of parrot and palm tree whereas there exists no name to express the genus “parrot” or “palm”.

Secondly, this duality between word as category and word as sign for collective expert Once is so marked that under experimental conditions which isolate each hemisphere’s contribution to language in modern humans one can lay bare the two separate roles. Take this experiment carried out by Deglin (1993 ). Subjects were asked questions in the mime date aftermath of receiving electroconvulsive therapy (electroconvulsive therapy) to either the right or left hemisphere for their psychiatric condition, essentially inducing a brief uni-hemispheric mode of being human. Under conditions of left hemisphere suppression (right Semi sphere alone viable) they were asked whether some object, for example, brother, was ap propriately named or whether another name would do, for example, sister, or even a made-up word. The subjects replied along the lines of this one, who said “Brother, that’s someone who’s a blood relation and that’s why it’s a brother. You can’t call it anything Thought, Speech, and Language Disorders else!” When their right hemisphere was suppressed (left hemisphere alone viable) they replied that “brother” could easily be called something else. The author concluded: The right hemisphere does not know that a verbal sign is arbitrary and coven tonal. It appears in fact that for the right hemisphere the verbal sign is as firmly attached to the object, indeed part of the object, as its form, color or smell.

Extant Phenomenological Psychopathology As mentioned, the greatest psychopathologists of the past—Minkowski, Binswanger, Blankenburg—wrote nothing on our topic. The only psychopathologist of any standing who dissociative identity disorder was Goldstein, primarily a neurologist but related to and mentored by Cassirer, one of the great philosophers of the twentieth century, who, although not usually regarded as a phenomenological philosopher, was exquisitely aware of the issues.

What Goldstein and Cassirer (1929/1957) appreciated about aphasia was something that no one else had properly grasped, which was that a braindamaged subject might be unable to utter a particular word in one context, but could do so in another. For example, one patient could not name a watch [ Uhr ] but when asked what time it was readily replied “ ein Uhr ” [one o’clock]. This showed that the very same word “ Uhr ” was unavailable in one situation and available in another, an indictment of all theories which treated aphasia as a static loss of word retrieval. Goldstein went on to for Emulate schizophrenic language and thought as a loss of the abstract attitude. This was wrong but his (p. 455) insight into the dynamic nature of aphasia chimes with the Russian studies on a word’s dual status and informs our general formulation.

Philosophical Resources of These Psychopath # logical Issues Thought, speech, and language disorders at first sight offer a bewildering array of seem Jingly random entities. As we have shown, a psychological account of these misses the point by either denying the intrinsic linguistic nature of most of them or by proposing a single explanation which is then easily rebutted. Carefully conducted linguistic analyses, however, reveal clear differences between the three generic varieties—aphasia, non-aha sic misnaming, and formal thought disorder—and show that each is predominantly a lan gauge disorder but of a different sort from the others. Neuropsychological investigations, and the only extant phenomenological study of the matter, uncover an overriding duality in the way a single word functions in human discourse: 1) as a virtual property of a thing experienced; and 2) as an arbitrary name for the sort of thing by which experience can be categorized.

Thought, Speech, and Language Disorders What can the chief phenomenological philosophers—Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-Monty, Schemer—offer us, such that we can say that there is a viable philosophical phenomena logical psychopathology of the matter in question which linguistic and neuropsychological approaches have not exhausted?

Each of these philosophers had a different view of language and there is certainly no con Census as to the phenomenology of language. Husserl was of the opinion that speech localized and temporalized an ideal meaning. This was a top-down approach, whereby language substantiated itself as speech in the here and now of an individual speaker. Thought was primary, and language and speech a particular mode of this. Hei dagger, in two articles in particular in his many writings on language —“Language” (1959/1971a) and “The Nature of Language” ( Heidegger 1959/1971b), took the opposite line. For him, language was the primary means whereby human beings could not only think but be human beings at all and, furthermore, have any sense of things around them: Where word breaks off no thing may be.

(Heidegger 77)

Merleau-Monty’s (1960/1964) On the Phenomenology of Language charts a middle path between these extremes of thought as language and language as thought. Ever alert to the human being’s dual status as perceive being perceived or Voucher being touched, and to how this breaches the divide between idealism and realism, he formulates lan gauge in a similar way, as a revelation of the other by virtue of the meaning I put into my speech: When I speak or understand, I experience that presence of others in myself or of myself in others which is the stumbling-block of the theory of intersubjectivity...

To the extent that what I say has meaning, I am a different ‘other’ for myself when I am speaking; and to the extent that I understand, I no longer know who is speak ing and who is listening.

(Merleau-Monty 1960/1964: 97)

(p. 456) Schemer (1926/2008), who wrote very little about language, nevertheless foresaw the results of the aforementioned neuropsychological investigations, and had a complete ly different view on language from the other three philosophers dealt with here: Whatever meaning we derive from an object originally belongs to that object, and not to our subsumption or meaning which we put on to it... The sequence is ob Sect → word, not word → object... The original meaning adhering to something actually forms the basis of the qualities.

(Schemer 1926/2008: 396)

Thought, Speech, and Language Disorders With the gradual individualization of the human being, Schemer goes on to say, thinking takes different turns, the result of pondering on one’s operations on objects of various sorts, culminating in a matrix of their essences. This allows different levels of sophistic son of language but this is always the handmaiden of thought, not the other way round.

Schemer’s view conforms better than the others to the neuropsychological and psy chopathological facts with which we are confronted. Were speech the temporalization and spatialization of a universal grammar, as Husserl, and later Chomsky, opined, why should the word “ Uhr ” come and go in someone with brain damage or the word “brother” be both a property of an object and an arbitrary name depending on which hemisphere is in play. If language were the “making of man” and “where word breaks off no thing may be” (Heidegger) how is it that severe aphasics such as Brock’s original case “Tan tan,” so-called because that was his only word, are apparently no less human and no less aware of things than the rest of us, as evidenced by “Tan tan’s” undiminished ability to communicate his needs using this single word. If Merleau-Monty was right in supposing that language opens up the world of the other to us why was it that one severely aphasic patient was reputedly more adept at identifying which politicians were lying on television than when he had his full language faculties.

Only Schemer’s view, or some similar thesis, which acknowledges the primacy of the ob Sect and a word’s original enmeshment in this but not its genesis, and which envisages further stages in thought development, each with a different sort of linguistic contribu son, can do justice to the psychopathology on display in this field. Only some such thesis can explain the multiplicity apparent here—a failure of language as communication (nonaphasic misnaming), a different sort of failure of language as a set of phonemic, syntactic, and semantic disordered rules with preserved communication (aphasia), and a dual fail ure of language as communication breakdown coupled with idiosyncratic disregard of the rules governing the formation of the core elements of language. PAGE_BREAK Affectivity and Its Disorders draws on Martin Heidegger’s phenomenology of moods and his conception of Befindlichkeit in an effort to critique traditional psychological and be haviorist views of affectivity. On Heidegger’s account, moods are not fleeting or contain gent aspects of experience but rather constitutive of what it means ‘to be’ human insofar as they serve as the mediating horizon or atmosphere that makes it possible for things to Effectively matter to us. The primary aim of this chapter is to explore the ways in which psychopathologic experience disrupts and modifies the structure of Befindlichkeit and the mediating capacity of moods. This structural disruption is examined from the perspex Dives of embodiment, being-with-others, and temporality.

Keywords: Heidegger, phenomenology, Befindlichkeit, moods, emotions, embodiment, being-with-others, tempo Orality, psychopathology # Introduction THE impact of phenomenology on our current understanding of psychopathology is in formed, largely, through the ways in which it challenges traditional psychological and be haviorist views that regard emotions and moods in terms of subjective mental states that reside “inside” the minds or brain of the individual; are generally caused by Dexter nal stimuli; and generate evidence that can be identified in the “outer” behavior—for example, speech patterns, posture, movements, facial expressions, etc.—of the individual. Martin Heidegger’s phenomenology of “mood” ( Stimmung ) has been especially influential in dismantling this view. By interpreting the human being not as a substance—as an en capsulated mind or ego cogito, for instance, or some combination of physical and mental substance—but in terms of the unitary activity of “being-in-the-world,” Heidegger dis solves the “inner/outer” distinction by positing how moods disclose the way we are al ready Effectively bound up in the world. Thus, in Being and Time, he writes, “A mood as sails us. It comes neither from ‘outside’ nor from ‘inside’, but arises out of being-in-theworld... Having a mood is not related to the psychical... and is not itself an inner con Affectivity and Its Disorders Edition which then reaches forth in an enigmatical way and puts its mark on things and persons” (1927/1962: 137).

On this account, moods are not to be viewed as fleeting or contingent aspects of human experience. They are, rather, constitutive of what it means “ to be ” human, which means we are structurally Effective or “Hooded” ( stimmungsmässigen ) beings. Heidegger refers to this structure of existence in terms of Befindlichkeit, a notoriously difficult word to translate that is sometimes rendered as “affectedness” but is perhaps best understood as “situatedness” in the sense that a condition or structure of being human is that we invari ably “find” ( Linden ) ourselves bound up in worldly situations where things—for example, people, cultural practices, natural events, equipment, etc.—Effectively “matter to” us in 1 specific ways. (p. 460) Understood this way, we cannot help but find ourselves in moods because we are already woven into a normative field or horizon of meaning that makes particular emotions possible, where, for instance, a thunder storm can disclose itself as 2 frightening, a long lecture as boring, or an impending ski trip as exciting. This means “emotions” are distinct from “moods” in the sense that the former are intentionally spe civic; they have the character of being “about” something insofar as they are directed at particular objects, events, and situations in the world. They also have determinate causes and are relatively intense, focused, and short-lived. Moods, on the other hand, are more enduring, unfocused, and indeterminate; they do not have an intentional correlate and are, consequently not directed at particular objects in the world but to the world as a whole. Moods are atmospheric or global feelings-states to the extent that they both affect Lively color and open up a person’s perceptual field or horizon of awareness. This explains why Heidegger says: “Moods are not side-effects, but are something which in advance determines our being with one another. It seems as though moods [are] in each case already there... like an atmosphere in which we immerse our selves in each case and which then attunes us through and through” (1995: 67). When ex poring the nature of psychopathology then, it important to take care in distinguishing be tween different kinds of Effective states. There is a profound difference, for instance, be tween a person who is depressed about something or anxious toward someone on the one hand, and a person who is globally depressed and anxious. In the latter instance, depress ion and anxiety constitute an a prior background or horizon on the basis of which a per son can Effectively experience or perceive anything. Moods are not generalized and dif fuse emotions but, rather, serve as the condition for the possibility of emotions, for any thing to Effectively “matter” to us in the first place. On this account, it is usually a person’s moods, not their emotions that are illuminated in psychopathologic states.

On this account, moods are not to be viewed as fleeting or contingent aspects of human experience. They are, rather, constitutive of what it means “ to be ” human, which means we are structurally Effective or “Hooded” ( stimmungsmässigen ) beings. Heidegger refers to this structure of existence in terms of Befindlichkeit, a notoriously difficult word to translate that is sometimes rendered as “affectedness” but is perhaps best understood as “situatedness” in the sense that a condition or structure of being human is that we invari ably “find” ( Linden ) ourselves bound up in worldly situations where things—for example, people, cultural practices, natural events, equipment, etc.—Effectively “matter to” us in 1 specific ways. (p. 460) Understood this way, we cannot help but find ourselves in moods because we are already woven into a normative field or horizon of meaning that makes particular emotions possible, where, for instance, a thunder storm can disclose itself as 2 frightening, a long lecture as boring, or an impending ski trip as exciting. This means “emotions” are distinct from “moods” in the sense that the former are intentionally spe civic; they have the character of being “about” something insofar as they are directed at particular objects, events, and situations in the world. They also have determinate causes and are relatively intense, focused, and short-lived. Moods, on the other hand, are more enduring, unfocused, and indeterminate; they do not have an intentional correlate and are, consequently not directed at particular objects in the world but to the world as a whole. Moods are atmospheric or global feelings-states to the extent that they both affect Lively color and open up a person’s perceptual field or horizon of awareness. This explains why Heidegger says: “Moods are not side-effects, but are something which in advance determines our being with one another. It seems as though moods [are] in each case already there... like an atmosphere in which we immerse our selves in each case and which then attunes us through and through” (1995: 67). When ex poring the nature of psychopathology then, it important to take care in distinguishing be tween different kinds of Effective states. There is a profound difference, for instance, be tween a person who is depressed about something or anxious toward someone on the one hand, and a person who is globally depressed and anxious. In the latter instance, depress ion and anxiety constitute an a prior background or horizon on the basis of which a per son can Effectively experience or perceive anything. Moods are not generalized and dif fuse emotions but, rather, serve as the condition for the possibility of emotions, for any thing to Effectively “matter” to us in the first place. On this account, it is usually a person’s moods, not their emotions that are illuminated in psychopathologic states.

When we are healthy and going about our daily lives, this background sense of “matter ing” is so close and familiar that it withdraws to the extent that we are unaware of our moods. This poses unique challenges for psychologists and psychiatrists because moods are generally disclosed to us pre-reflectively, that is, “ prior to all cognition and volition, and beyond their range of disclosure” ( Heidegger 1927/1962: 136). We cannot get behind our moods and examine them from a perspective of objectivity and detachment because this dispassionate perspective is itself a mood. Thus, the best way to gain access to the Affectivity and Its Disorders lived experience and meaning of psychopathology is not by taking an attitude of theoretic cal detachment but by attending to first-person descriptions of how the Effective and ori Denting structure of Befindlichkeit is disrupted or breaks down. The following draws on ex periential accounts to illuminate this structural disruption from three different perspex Dives: embodiment, being-with-others, and temporality.

(p. 461) Embodiment One way to grasp how Befindlichkeit dissolves the “inner/outer” distinction is to see it in terms of what Matthew Radcliffe calls “existential feeling,” that is, both a “feeling of the body” and a “way of finding oneself in the world” (2008: 2). Like moods, existential feel Dings are not directed at specific objects or situations in the world but serve, rather, as the background orientation or grip that structures our Effective experience of objects and sit Cations. When we are healthy this mediating grip remains hidden or concealed from us in 3 the sense that we are not self-consciously aware of it. A signature aspect of the existed ital feeling of health, then, is our Effective connection with the world, a taken-for-granted bond that makes it possible to intentionally move through lived space, to reach out and handle equipment, engage with others, and perform workday tasks. In this state, the body is not a conspicuous “physical object” ( Köper ) that I am contingently connected to. It is, rather, a “lived body” ( Lab ), the living medium through which I engage the world and af festively experience things, and it disappears in the spontaneous performance and flow of these tasks.

Psychopathological states tend to disrupt the mediating activity of existential feeling, re salting in ordinary tasks presenting themselves as difficult if not impossible. First-person accounts often refer to feelings of being “immobilized,” “frozen,” “stiffened,” and “para lazed”. Pulled out of its seamless bond with the world, our body reveals itself as an obstacle or burden, as a clumsy, lethargic, and heavy object. In this state, the sufferer becomes acutely aware of bodily phenomena that were previously con Healed in the flow of everydayness such as constriction in the chest when breathing, nau sea in the stomach, pain in the joints, or pressure and a dull ache in the head. In severe cases the body is described in a depersonalized way as not even belong ing to oneself, showing up as “unreal,” “alien,” or even “dead” as can be the case in Dotard’s syndrome, where a sufferer may no longer feel their own body or the sensations of taste, smell, and touch. When we experience our corporeality in this way, lived space invariably begins to close up or shrink as perception, sensory motor function, and bodily movement become increasingly inhibited and constrained resulting in slowed speech patterns and postural changes such as a bowed head, lowered Ghoul Hers, and a sluggish gait.

Affectivity and Its Disorders # Being-with-Others As a way of finding oneself in a world, existential feelings also disclose the unique ways in which this world is shared or inter-Effective. On this view, I am not an isolated and selfenclosed subject of experience but a situated or public way of being, and I understand who (p. 462) I am and what matters to me only in relation to my involvement with others. This relational ontology suggests my identity or self-interpretation is indelibly shaped by how others understand and perceive me. Psychopathology, in this regard, often creates a “stigmatized identity” as agitation, awkward behavior, and inhibited motility and comportment disrupts the social order and the taken-for-granted flow of dai ly life. And this disruption is invariably mirrored or reflected back on the suffering Hindi visual. The gaze of the other leaves a stigma or mark that not only exacerbates already diminished sensory motor capacities and competencies in handling ordinary social situ sons; it also shapes and constitutes the sufferer’s self-interpretation. This is what Heideg ger means when he refers to “the real dictatorship of [ the They ]” (1927/1962: 126). The fact that existential feelings disclose how we find ourselves in a public world illuminates the ways in which others exercise a silent power over us to such an extent that they “sup ply the answer to the question of who [we are]” [My emphasis].

Understanding the self in terms of being-with-others captures the way in which psy chopathology should not be viewed in terms of private mental states located “inside” the head of the individual. It is, rather, a public expression of meaning and significance that disturbs the pre-given web of social expectations characteristic of health and normalcy. And this disturbance is often complicated by the fact that the source of psychopathology is not physically visible to others as it is with most somatic conditions. Without a wheel chair, physical lesion, or cane to point to, for example, the individual suffering from psy chopathology can be further stigmatized and discredited for acting on the basis of some thing that is “unreal,” “in your head,” or worse, a “moral failing”. This can result in feelings of reflexive shame and guilt, social phobia, and isolating behave ior, which in turn creates a downward spiral that further undermines health.

Temporality Psychopathology can also distort the experience of time. On a physiological level, it can create the experience of, what Thomas Fuchs (2005 ) calls, “desynchronization” that dis Erupts the natural rhythmic equilibrium of the body as it pertains to processes such as sleep and menstrual cycles, digestion, temperature regulation, appetite, and sexual de sire, and this can be extended to mood disturbances arising from bodily disunity with sea Tonal and atmospheric rhythms such as Seasonal Effective Disorder (SAD). On a social level, desynchronization can result in a sense of disconnection from public time as the busy demands of work and interactions with family and friends clash with lethargic moil ity and dulled cognitive functioning. References to feeling “overwhelmed,” “unable to keep up,” and “stressed” by the accelerated pace and harried obligations of modern life Affectivity and Its Disorders are common. This can result in the erosion of stabilizing relation ships and emotional support systems that can exacerbate the experience of isolation and loneliness, leading to feelings of “emptiness,” “indifference,” and “spiritual barrenness”.

In addition to the physiological and social aspects of desynchronization, there is also an existential dimension that involves the contraction or closing up of lived time, where this is understood as the horizon of sociohistorical possibilities that are open to the individual (p. 463) in creating his or her own identity or self-interpretation. Against the conventional view of time as a linear sequence of “now-points” that is external to us (e.g. clock-time), the phenomenological tradition introduces the idea that human existence is structured by time as a unified manifold that simultaneously stretches backward into the “past” and for ward into the “future.” Heidegger will refer to this manifold structure in terms of “thrown projection” in the sense that, out of the present, we are thrown into a specific situation (the past), and it is against the background of this situation that we press forward or project into future possibilities. Our temporal constitution is “ex-static” in the sense that we already “stand” ( stasis ) “outside” ( ex ) of ourselves by “running forward” ( vorlaufen ) into the future, into historically situated projects, identities, vocations, and relationships. Psychopathology disrupts this temporal unity and closes down the future as a horizon of possibilities. The result is a feeling of being trapped in “the present”. This experience of temporal collapse is often described in terms of the “slowing-down,” “drag Ding,” or even “stopping” of time, and this makes it difficult to envision a meaningful identity or interpretation of who I might be in the future.

In addition to the physiological and social aspects of desynchronization, there is also an existential dimension that involves the contraction or closing up of lived time, where this is understood as the horizon of sociohistorical possibilities that are open to the individual (p. 463) in creating his or her own identity or self-interpretation. Against the conventional view of time as a linear sequence of “now-points” that is external to us (e.g. clock-time), the phenomenological tradition introduces the idea that human existence is structured by time as a unified manifold that simultaneously stretches backward into the “past” and for ward into the “future.” Heidegger will refer to this manifold structure in terms of “thrown projection” in the sense that, out of the present, we are thrown into a specific situation (the past), and it is against the background of this situation that we press forward or project into future possibilities. Our temporal constitution is “ex-static” in the sense that we already “stand” ( stasis ) “outside” ( ex ) of ourselves by “running forward” ( vorlaufen ) into the future, into historically situated projects, identities, vocations, and relationships. Psychopathology disrupts this temporal unity and closes down the future as a horizon of possibilities. The result is a feeling of being trapped in “the present”. This experience of temporal collapse is often described in terms of the “slowing-down,” “drag Ding,” or even “stopping” of time, and this makes it difficult to envision a meaningful identity or interpretation of who I might be in the future.

When the future contracts or closes down in this way, it can strip away the capacity for self-determination, that is, to interpret and give meaning to one’s own situation. One of the distinctive features of the existential–phenomenological tradition, in this regard, is a configuration of the self as a relational tension between “facticity” (“being-in-itself”) on the one hand and “transcendence” (“being-for-itself”) on the other. This means humans do not act simply out of necessity arising out of the Tactical limitations of our physiology cal, sexual, or sociohistorical givenness. We are, rather, self-conscious beings that have the capacity to transcend or surpass these limitations by choosing to take a stand on them and giving them meaning. On this view, we understand who we are only in terms of the possibilities that we project for ourselves in the future by interpreting and taking a stand on the past that we have been thrown into. Psychopathology can erode away the meaning and significance of both the future and the past and, consequently, dim one’s ability make or create oneself through meaning-giving choices. The future opens up not as an expansive horizon rich with Effective meaning and significance but as a narrow and constricted “black hole” with possibilities that are Effectively “meaningless” and “Mega Dive”. This means, in severe cases of temporal collapse, the very possibility of selfhood can be called into question.

Affectivity and Its Disorders Bibliography Aho J. and Aho K.. Body Matters: A Phenomenology of Sickness, Illness, and Dis ease. Latham: Lexington Books. Aho K.. “Acceleration and Time Pathologies: The Critique of Psychology in Heidegger’s Beiträge.” Time and Society 16: 25–42. Aho K.. “Depression and Embodiment: Phenomenological Reflections on Motility, Affectivity, and Transcendence.” Medicine, Healthcare, and Philosophy 16: 751–759. Dreyfus H.. Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time, Di vision I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Elpidorou A. and Freeman L.. “Affectivity in Heidegger I: Moods and Emotions in Being and Time.” Philosophy Compass 10: 661–671.

(p. 464) Fuchs T.. “The Phenomenology of Shame, Guilt, and the Body in Body Dys morphia Disorder and Depression.” Journal of Phenomenological Psychology 33: 223– 243. Fuchs T.. “The Phenomenology of the Body, Space and Time in Depression.” Com prendre 15: 108–121. Fuchs T.. “The Phenomenology of Affectivity.” In K. W. M. Fulford, M. Davies, R. Gimps, G. Graham, J. Saddler, G. Stanghellini, and T. Thornton (eating disorders.), Oxford Handbooks Online. doi: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199579563.013.0038 Gadamer H. G.. The Enigma of Health. Stanford: Stanford University Press. Hoffman E.. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. New York: Touchstone Books. Guignon C.. “Moods in Heidegger’s Being and Time.” In R. Solomon and C. Cal Noun (eating disorders.), What is an Emotion? Classic and Contemporary Readings Oxford: Oxford Uni varsity Press. Haugeland J.. Casein Disclosed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Heidegger M. (1927/1962). Being and Time, trans. E. Robinson and J. Macquarrie. New York: Harper and Row. Heidegger M.. Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Solitude, trans. W. McNeil and N. Walker. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Carp D.. Speaking of Sadness: Depression, Disconnection, and the Meaning of Ill Bess. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Ceder D.. The Absent Body. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Affectivity and Its Disorders Bibliography Aho J. and Aho K.. Body Matters: A Phenomenology of Sickness, Illness, and Dis ease. Latham: Lexington Books. Aho K.. “Acceleration and Time Pathologies: The Critique of Psychology in Heidegger’s Beiträge.” Time and Society 16: 25–42. Aho K.. “Depression and Embodiment: Phenomenological Reflections on Motility, Affectivity, and Transcendence.” Medicine, Healthcare, and Philosophy 16: 751–759. Dreyfus H.. Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time, Di vision I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Elpidorou A. and Freeman L.. “Affectivity in Heidegger I: Moods and Emotions in Being and Time.” Philosophy Compass 10: 661–671.

(p. 464) Fuchs T.. “The Phenomenology of Shame, Guilt, and the Body in Body Dys morphia Disorder and Depression.” Journal of Phenomenological Psychology 33: 223– 243. Fuchs T.. “The Phenomenology of the Body, Space and Time in Depression.” Com prendre 15: 108–121. Fuchs T.. “The Phenomenology of Affectivity.” In K. W. M. Fulford, M. Davies, R. Gimps, G. Graham, J. Saddler, G. Stanghellini, and T. Thornton (eating disorders.), Oxford Handbooks Online. doi: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199579563.013.0038 Gadamer H. G.. The Enigma of Health. Stanford: Stanford University Press. Hoffman E.. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. New York: Touchstone Books. Guignon C.. “Moods in Heidegger’s Being and Time.” In R. Solomon and C. Cal Noun (eating disorders.), What is an Emotion? Classic and Contemporary Readings Oxford: Oxford Uni varsity Press. Haugeland J.. Casein Disclosed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Heidegger M. (1927/1962). Being and Time, trans. E. Robinson and J. Macquarrie. New York: Harper and Row. Heidegger M.. Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Solitude, trans. W. McNeil and N. Walker. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Carp D.. Speaking of Sadness: Depression, Disconnection, and the Meaning of Ill Bess. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Ceder D.. The Absent Body. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Affectivity and Its Disorders Levine R.. A Geography of Time. New York: Basic Books.

Levine R.. “A Geography of Busyness.” Social Research 72: 355–370.

Radcliffe M.. Feelings of Being: Phenomenology, Psychiatry and the Sense of Real ty. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Radcliffe M.. Experiences of Depression: A Study in Phenomenology. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R.. Emotions and Personhood: Exploring Fragility— Making Sense of Vulnerability. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Sveneaus F.. The Hermeneutic of Medicine and the Phenomenology of Health: Steps Towards a Philosophy of Medical Practice. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Elmer D. K. and Schwartzburd L.. “Treatment of Time Pathologies.” In Heart and Mind: The Practice of Cardiac Psychology. Washington: American Psychological Associa son.

Wrathall M.. “Background Practices, Capacities, and Heideggerian Disclosure.” In Heidegger, Coping, and Cognitive Science: A Festschrift for Hubert Dreyfus. Vol. 2, pp. 93–114. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Notes:

1 ( ) Befindlichkeit is derived from “ befinden ” (“to find oneself in a certain state or situ son”) as in the ordinary expression “ Wie befinden Sie site?” which means “How are you?” or more literally, “How do you find ( Linden ) yourself?” It has, over the years, been translated in a number of ways as “state of mind” ( Heidegger 1927/1962 ), “affected Bess,”, “disposition” and “findingness”. I follow Guignon’s translation as “situatedness” because it best captures the sense of being bound up in an Effective context or situation.

2 ( ) This is why Heidegger says, “The fact that moods can deteriorate and change over time means simply that in every case Casein [human existence] always has some mood” (1927/1962: 134).

3 ( ) Hans Reorg-Gadamer (1996 ) describes the inconspicuousness of health in the follow ing way: “Health is not a condition that one introspectively feels in oneself. Rather, it is a condition of being involved, of being-in-the-world, of being together with one’s fellow hu man beings, of active and rewarding engagement in one’s everyday tasks” (113, my em phases).

Kevin Aho Affectivity and Its Disorders Department of Communication & Philosophy, College of Arts and Sciences, Florida Gulf Coast University Affectivity and Its Disorders Department of Communication & Philosophy, College of Arts and Sciences, Florida Gulf Coast University Selfhood and Its Disorders # Selfhood and Its Disorders Josef Paras and Mads Gram Henriksen The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article explores some of the major views of selfhood in modern philosophical and psychopathological literature, including the distinction between minimal-experiential and narrative-personal self, and it presents a simplified classification of how different levels of selfhood can be disturbed in different mental disorders. It proposes that schizophrenia spectrum disorders primarily involve a trait-like disturbance of the minimal-experiential self, which also may affect the coherence and stability of the narrative-personal self. Melancholia may involve some state-like disturbances of the minimal-experiential self, but with largely intact ipseity, and these disturbances appear here to be secondary to Visor Hers of mood, temporality, and embodiment. Personality disorders outside the schizophre nia spectrum involve disturbances of the personal-narrative self and here the minimal-ex periential self is never at stake. Finally, it offers some critical reflections on the epidemiclike rise of diagnoses such as dissociative disorders and depersonalization.

Keywords: minimal self, ipseity, narrative self, schizophrenia, melancholia, personality disorders, dissociative dis orders, depersonalization # Introduction IF the concept of self is equated with that of the “psyche” in its common sense meaning or with that of “personality,” then, trivially, all mental disorders are in some way Visor Hers of selfhood. Therefore, a conceptual framework that defines and marks out the boundaries of these concepts is needed. The concept of the self is perhaps one of the most debated and fascinating philosophical concepts, with a remarkable recent renais chance in philosophy and psychopathology. The literature is full of differ ent and proliferating concepts of the self—for example, Strawson once summarized the contemporary discussions on the self within a single, academic journal, finding no less than twenty-one different concepts of the self (1999: 484).

Selfhood and Its Disorders In this essay, we first present a simplified classification of some major views on the self that can be found in modern philosophical and psychopathological literature. Subsequent ly, we explore how different levels or aspects of selfhood can be unstable or disturbed in different mental disorders.

Concepts of Self The “No Self” Doctrines These theories comprise a vast range of claims. Some of the early, critical approaches to the self can be found in Hume, who, in his famous search for the “self,” was unable to find 1 it or, in (p. 466) Nietzsche, who claimed that “The ‘subject’ is only a fiction: the ego of which one speaks when one censures egoism does not exist at all” (1967: 199). In twenty eth-century philosophy, we find the structuralist and postmodernist proclamation of the “death” or “disappearing” of the subject. The subject or the self is here a “de-centered,” passive locus of intersection of multiple historical, ideological, and socio-economical powers and discourses. Another view, predominantly originating in ana lyric philosophy, is to consider the self (or the “I”) as a purely linguistic indexical device, bereft of any ontological thickness or of phenomenological significance. On yet another view, the Buddhist-oriented “no self” claims are, in fact, not denying individual self-exp rience but rather arguing that the experience of self is illusory (in a very specific sense [e.g. Albahari 2006 ]). From the position of phenomenological psychiatry, a common fea Cure of the “no self” doctrines is their limited utility or even inapplicability to clinical work—are we, for example, supposed to calm a patient, expressing a terrifying lack of the sense of self, that such a sense under all circumstances is an illusory construction?

The “Experiential Self” Doctrines The most prominent “experiential self” doctrines of our time are arguably found within phenomenology. Notably, these doctrines have important pride 2 Lessors, for example, within German idealism. From a phenomenological perspective, all experience manifests in the first-person perspective as “my” experience—that is, the firstperson givenness of experience implies a sense of “mine-Bess,” “for-me-Bess,” or “ipseity” that transpires through the flux of time and changing modalities of consciousness (Paras and Sass 2011; Henriksen and Paras 2014: 543f.). Crucially, the self, in the phenomena logical sense, is not given as some kind of “object” that may show up in our experience; it is also not construed as some hypothetical substrate beneath the-stream of conscious Bess, somehow linking or unifying its different modalities; and, finally, the self is also not considered fully absent, unconscious, or otherwise experientially inaccessible. Rather, the phenomenological view is that the self manifests itself pre-reflectively as a specific mode or configuration of experience. I am always pre-reflectively aware of being myself and I have no need for self-reflection to assure myself of being myself (e.g. I do not need to re Elect upon who these feelings or thoughts might belong to in order to know that it is me ). Differently put, pre-reflective self-awareness makes self-reflection possible (Sartre 2003: Selfhood and Its Disorders 9). The reflecting (Poetic) self recognizes itself in the reflected-upon (noematic) self with out any need of criteria-based self-identification. Most importantly, this pre-reflective, ex periential self is an intrinsic feature of experience that is operative in all forms of expert Once, imbuing all (p. 467) my experiences with an elusive, yet absolutely vital feeling of “Ime-myself” (e.g. Sass and Paras 2003: 428f.; Hart 2009: 310; Henriksen and Nordgaard 2014: 436). This persistent, propertyless feeling of “I-me-myself” or “for-me-Bess” consti Lutes the very “foundation” upon which richer, more complex forms of selfhood such as personhood or narrativity are constructed throughout our lives (Henriksen and Paras 2014: 543f.). The “pre-reflective,” “minimal,” or “experiential” self, as the ubiquitous firstperson feature of experience, can be descriptively expanded to entail a sense of singularity, synchronic and diachronic self-identity, embodiment, and self–other demarcation.

The Self as a Person or Narrative Structure An appropriate answer to the question “Who am I?” would be something like “I am XY, with this particular age and body, these particular preferences, values, inclinations, and dispositions (including cognitive abilities, knowledge, temperamental features), and char cater.” This personal or narrative self is a product of countless interactions with other people (especially caregivers in childhood) and objects throughout life. They are partly re Gained in my explicit and implicit memory and partly sedimented in my dispositional repertoire, my “habits,” as it were. My personal narrative forms what has been called an “inhere Lebensgeschichte,” that is, a story that I tell myself and others and that maxi misses the coherence of my personal life vicissitudes. Obviously, the personal or narrative self is heavily dependent on language and culture, and we may consider it the most com Alex and sophisticated form of selfhood.

The minimal or experiential self enters into this personal-narrative structure as a recon Edition, configuring the modes of experiential life. In other words, there is no contradiction or tension between the minimal-experiential self and the personal-narrative self. The nar Dative self has a highly complex identity-structure, which has been well captured by, among others, Ricoeur (1992 ), who operates with a dialectics of “Apse”-identity (“self”) and of “idem”-identity (“same” [même]). Sameness (“idem-identity”) can be illustrated, in extremes, by the permanence or unchanging persistence of a stone; whereas selfhood (“Apse-identity” or “ipseity”) implies no “unchanging core of the personality” (1992: 2). In brief, an individual remains in some sense the same person throughout life with a form of sameness, whose components nonetheless change (e.g. the aging body), and where its identity is achieved by the interaction between the “self,” the “same,” and others. The self (“Apse”), in this triangle, is the unchanging first-person perspective—for example, if I keep a promise that I made twenty years ago, we can say that despite the fact that all my psy chophysical characteristics have changed, the identity of the one “who” made the promise, that is, “me,” remains intact.

Selfhood and Its Disorders # Disorders of Self Talking about “disorders” of “something” derives from a discourse in somatic medicine, where we, for example, can talk about “diseases” of the “liver.” When we say “disorders” of (p. 468) “tenth,” then the “tenth” is envisaged as a well-demarcated “object,” which is then “disturbed” in the sense of not functioning properly. However, it is difficult to replace the object “tenth” with the concept of “self,” because the self, in the phenomenological or expert entail sense, is precisely not an object, thing, or organ. As initially noted, all mental Visor Hers may have some consequences or connotations that are reflected in some aspects or levels of selfhood. A complementary problem is linked to nosological issues. In brief, many of the contemporary diagnoses that display an epidemic-like rise in incidence (e.g. autism spectrum disorders, borderline personality disorder, and dissociative conditions) have very poor validity. Many of these issues are associated with an in creasing tendency of basing a diagnosis on symptom checklists, either self-rated by the patient or ascertained through a structured, psychiatric interview. For the purpose of this article, we explore only the schizophrenia spectrum disorders, melancholia, other psychiatric syn domes, and personality disorders (most of which admittedly also have questionable valid ity). In our view, it is only in the case of schizophrenia spectrum disorders that we may truly talk about disorders of the self as a fundamental and generative feature of the ill Bess. In the case of melancholia, we may identify certain pathologies of self-experience and certain personality characteristics (viz. types melancholics ), but these manifestations seem to be mainly secondary to the under lying disorder of melancholia, which is most likely of temporality or, as Fuchs puts it, re Cults from a desynchronization of the temporal relation of organism and environment.

The Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders Systematic, phenomenologically informed empirical studies demonstrate an altered subjective life in patients with schizophrenia spectrum dis orders, reflected in the presence of certain trait-like (i.e. enduring rather than episodic), non-psychotic, anomalous self-experiences (viz. “self-disorders”)—for a review of the em pirical studies, see Paras and Henriksen.

In the following, we illuminate some of the central features of the altered subjective life in the schizophrenia spectrum. Typically, patients complain of feeling ephemeral, of lack ing an inner “core” or “nucleus,” and not knowing who they truly are. These experiences are often intermingled with a feeling of being radically different from others (“Adders Rein”); a feeling that often has persisted since early childhood and which frequently is verbalized as being “wrong” ( Paras and Henriksen 2015: 237–238). It is a feeling of a difference so fundamental that it may resist further predication; it revolves around a feel ing of being ontologically or categorically different from others and it is often a source of Selfhood and Its Disorders a profound solitude—as one patient puts it, “I looked just like every other child, but inside I was different. It is as if I am another creature that somehow ended up inside a human body” ( Henriksen and Nordgaard 2014: 436). Childhood fantasies of being, say, a secrete adopted, time-traveler, or extra-terrestrial are regular attempts to grasp this enduring, unsettling feeling.

Furthermore, patients often suffer from a failing sense of self-presence or being one with oneself (i.e. automatic, criteria-less, non-mediated, self-coincidence or (p. 469) “radical self-recognition” [ Paras 2007 ]), which often invokes more reflective forms of self-identify cation to reassure oneself of being oneself, for example, persistent self-monitoring in which the patients excessively takes herself as an object of reflection (a form of hyper reflexivity [Sass and Paras 2003 ]). The failing saturation of self-presence (or “ipseity”) allows the experiential field of immanence to become increasingly alienated and spatial zed, for example, thoughts may appear as if not generated by the patient or they may be transformed into object-like entities, almost physically locatable to specific brain regions. There is a correlative, diminished sense of embodiment (e.g. the body or parts of it may feel strange, the body may feel as if it does not really fit or it may feel somehow disco nested from the mind) and of embodied presence in the shared-social world, which fre quently involve a decreased ability to be affected, drawn, or stimulated by others, objects, or situations. This diminished sense of immersion may also be linked to problems with “common sense”, indicative of disruptions at the level of immediate preconceptual resonance or attunement with the world. Typically, such problems manifest as difficulties in grasping what is contextually relevant and ap propriate and as a failing sense of what others consider self-evident (e.g. the natural evi Fences or the tacit axioms of social interaction). Finally, it merits attention that many pa taints report a variety of transitivistic experiences of permeability or blurring of self–oth er or self–world boundaries as well as a range of quasi-solipsistic experiences (e.g. fleet ing feelings of centrality, magical thinking, and insights into layers of reality that normal 3 ly are hidden from others).

Generally, self-disorders appear to have been present since childhood or early doles Fence and they are typically experienced in an ego-syntonic way as modes rather than ob Sects of experience—that is, though some self-disorders, but certainly not all, may be very distressing (e.g. “Anderssein” and transitivistic experiences), self-disorders are not exp rienced as “foreign elements” in the patients’ mental life but rather as intrinsic and habit ual aspects of their existence and identity, for example, reflected in statements such as 4 “this is just who I am”. Self-disorders form a crucial schizo phrenia spectrum vulnerability phenotype. They seem to precede, prefigure, and con strain the range of symptoms that may emerge.

The phenomenal nature of self-disorders in schizophrenia suggests that we are confront ed with a disorder of the “minimal” or “experiential” self. The self-disorder here is far more fundamental than any “self-related” complaints and behaviors or characterological traits encountered in the disorders outside the schizophrenia spectrum—for example, psychological self-image or self-esteem, that is, thematized self-representational problems Selfhood and Its Disorders 5 related at to “personal” or “narrative” selfhood. At this level, the “minimal” or “experien ital” self, that is, the ubiquitous first-person feature of experience, is never at stake. We have elsewhere proposed that a generative trait feature of schizophrenia is a disorder of “ipseity” or (p. 470) “minimal” self, viz. the Ipseity-Disturbance Model (Sass and Paras 2003; Cermolacce et al. 2007; Nelson et al. 2014; see also Sass’s chapter on “Schizophre nia as a self-disorder” in this volume). Finally, it merits attention that the notion of “Apse ity disorder” does not imply something like a lack or dissolution of the “minimal” self or the first-person perspective. Rather, it indicates an instability in the normally tacit, takenfor-granted, pre-reflective sense of being a subject of awareness and action, which no longer saturates the experiential life in the usual, unproblematic way ( Paras and Henrik sen 2014: 254–255).

Melancholia

Melancholia is another disorder with pronounced changes in the subjective life. However, it is important to realize from the very outset that a differential diagnosis between affect Dive illness and schizophrenia cannot be based on the phenomenological exploration of the qualities of depersonalization that are characteristic of these conditions. Rather, it is important to consider the overall synchronic and diachronic gestalts of the disorders. Typically, melancholia is an episodic disorder in which alterations of subjectivity are state-phenomena. The most important of these changes, apart from mood, are “desynchronization” (associated with global slowing or “inhibition” of cognitive and psy chomotor processes) and “corporealization” of the lived body. There is a lag between subjective-lived time and the intersubjective-objective time, with an en suing feeling of “not being able to...,” that is, a kind of global insufficiency that is often associated with self-alienation. The patient may feel a sort of inner burden or obstacle, yet the “ipseity” or “for-me-Bess” of experience remains intact in her self-relation—as Tatossian (2007 ) puts it, it is a relation of “moi à moi.” In melancholia, the mental processes are slowed down with diminished and/or delayed reactivity, activity, and cogni son (pseudo-dementia).

Moreover, existential time is also changed, that is, access to the future is blocked and the past relentlessly haunts the patient. The lived body loses its transparency and turns into a solid, material object, inhibiting access to the world in the sense of no longer opening it up as a realm of possibilities for action and intention. Increasingly unable to transcend the body, the patient gradually finds herself confined within a heavy, rigid, de Baying body (ibid.; Stanghellini et al. 2014 ). Consequently, patients typically report at va Piety of somatic complaints. In extremes, the profound sense of Revitalization in melancho lia results in the Dotard syndrome, where the patient feels dead inside (this syndrome may also be seen in schizophrenia).

In sum, we may encounter some disorders of the “experiential self” in melancholia but here they appear to be state-phenomena, with largely intact ipseity. These disorders are probably secondary to the disorders of mood, temporality, and embodiment.

Selfhood and Its Disorders # Other Psychiatric Syndromes Recent years have witnessed an increase in certain diagnostic categories (and a Lorre spending decrease in schizophrenia spectrum disorders), which, at least potentially, may involve disorders of the experiential self, for example, autistic spectrum disorders and dissociative disorders. We consider those increases to be, to a large extent, a reflection of (p. 471) differential-diagnostic disarray of operational psychiatric diagnosis. Thus, in many cases, what clinicians call “dissociative disorders,” fulfill the diagnostic criteria for schizo phrenia; similarly, those diagnosed with depersonalization typically suffer from schizotyp al disorder. Moreover, the concept of “dissociation” seems to have been trivialized to any kind of mental disintegration. If “dissociation” means disinter ration between mental contents and modalities, then all severe mental disorders contain an element of dissociation (e.g. a recurrent and disturbing obsession, a tendency to rum ate, or hearing a voice). In this case, the term does not contribute to psychopathological knowledge and seems vacuous. However, if “dissociation” is meant to indicate the xis Fence of two parallel or alternating subjective streams of consciousness that are mutually unaware of each other, then dissociation is not a condition seen in psychiatric practice.

Personality Disorders Insofar as it makes sense to use a phenomenological concept of self in the context of per Tonality disorders, it is crucial to realize that it is the concept of “personal-narrative” self that is at stake here, not that of the “minimal” or “experiential” self. With a few excel sons, there is no phenomenological tradition of studying personality. Jung’s influential “Psychological Types”, written from his particular analytic point of view, contains, nonetheless, phenomenologically oriented explorations of the interplay of cognition, feel Dings, and general orientation such as extraand introversion. Another, highly original ap roach to personality types, considering the latter as being reflective of more fundamen tal cognitive styles, can be found in the works of Shapiro.

In the clinical context, personality disorders are the matter of clinical psychology and psy chodynamic or cognitive behavior therapy. However, the very concept of “personality dis orders” is unclear and it seems that psychiatry is here entangled in its own insufficiently clarified terminological history. In brief, the concept of “personality” stems from moral philosophy. In the nineteenth century, the concept of “personality” was equated with that of the “psyche.” Thus, Robot’s famous textbook of psychiatry carried the title “Les Mal dies de la Personnalite ”. In the twentieth century, Jasper (1997 ) claims that pri Cary delusion involves a transformation of the “whole personality,” by which he means the very structures of subjectivity. The classification of Kurt Schneider, which forms the root of the current DSM-5 and ICD-10 classifications of personality disorders, contains categories that are in fact subsyndromic rather than re Electing pure personality types. Psychometric personality research emphasizes the follow ing five dimensions or factors: openness, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness, Selfhood and Its Disorders and neuroticism—these dimensions will be incorporated in the forthcoming ICD-11. These descriptive notions may be considered as features of the “personal-narrative” self.

Conclusion The concept of selfhood is not derived from psychopathology and even in philosophy there is little agreement upon its significations. Thus, from a global perspective, the con Dept (p. 472) of selfhood is of little value to clinicians and researchers. This situation could be perhaps ameliorated if the concept of self underwent more rigorous conceptualization and stratification. However, there is one important exception to this general statement, namely the case of schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Here, it seems that the disorders of self-presence and basic self–world relation are at the very core of the illness. Already now, this knowledge is applicable in a therapeutic context and useful for diagnostic and differ entail-diagnostic purposes. With respect to etiological research, we see a potential for a more integrative conceptualization of the neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophre nia. Such integration needs to involve the existing insights from developmental psychology, psychoanalysis, phenomenology, basic neuroscience, and mol Ocular genetics. This kind of integrative conceptualization might allow a formation of de rivative, more specific hypotheses, that are testable in empirical contexts. In the current neurobiological research of symptom-substrate correlations, it is, in our view, crucial to consider the phenotypic level of schizophrenia, not as aggregation of different symptoms but rather as a trait-like alteration of the basic structures of experience. PAGE_BREAK Paras J. and Henriksen M. G.. “Disturbance of the Experience of Self—A Phenom ecologically Based Approach.” In F. Waters and M. Stephan (eating disorders.), The Assessment of Psychosis: A Reference Book and Rating Scales for Research and Practice, pp. 235–244. New York: Rutledge.

Raballo A., Sæbye D., and Paras J.. “Looking at the Schizophrenia Spectrum through the Prism of Self-disorders: An Empirical Study.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 37: 344– 351.

Raballo A. and Paras J.. “Examination of Anomalous Self-experience: Initial Study of the Structure of Self-disorders in Schizophrenia Spectrum.” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 200: 577–583.

Robot T.. Les Maladies de la Personnalite. Paris: Alan.

Ricoeur P.. Oneself as Another, trans. K. Blimey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sartre J.-P.. Being and Nothingness: An Essay in Phenomenological Ontology, trans. H. E. Barnes. London, New York: Rutledge.

Sass L. A. and Paras J.. “Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self.” Schizophre nia Bulletin 29: 427–444.

Schneider K.. Die psychopathischen Perchönlichkeiten. Leipzig/Wain: Deuticke.

Shapiro D.. Neurotic Styles. New York: Basic Books.

Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., Blase S., Mancini M., Presenza S., Raballo A., and Cutting J.. “The Bodily Self: A Qualitative Study of Abnormal Bodily Phenomena in Persons with Schizophrenia.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 55: 1703–1711.

Strawson G.. “The Self and the SESMET.” In S. Gallagher and J. Shear (eating disorders.), Mod els of the Self, pp. 483–518. Thorverton: Imprint Academic.

Tatossian A.. La phénoménologie des psychoses. Le Circle Herméneutique, Collect son Phéno. Paris: Erin.

Selfhood and Its Disorders Tellenbach H.. Melancholy, trans. E. Eng. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

World Health Organization (WHO). The ICD-10. Classification of Mental and Be havioural Disorders. Geneva: WHO.

Zahavi D.. Subjectivity and Selfhood. Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Zahavi D.. Self and Other: Exploring Subjectivity, Empathy, and Shame. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Notes:

1 ( ) “For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on some particular perception or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never can catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can ob serve anything but the perception” ( Hume 1888: 252; author’s italics).

2 ( ) e.g. Kant writes, “I am therefore conscious of the identical self in regard to the Bani fold of the representations that are given to me in an intuition because I call them all to ether my representations, which constitute one. But that is as much as to say that I am conscious a prior of their necessary synthesis, which is called the original synthetic unity of apperception, under which all representations given to me stand, but under which they must also be brought by means of a synthesis” (1998: 248; author’s emphasis). By con toast, phenomenology does not consider the self as a non-experiential, transcendental condition of possibility for experience but as a fundamental, pre-reflective feature of ex perience (see Zahavi’s chapter on “Self” in this volume).

3 ( ) For rich clinical descriptions of self-disorders in schizophrenia, see Paras and Hand est, Henriksen and Paras, and Henriksen and Nordgaard.

4 ( ) We have elsewhere Preconceived the notion of “poor insight” in schizophrenia, suggest ing that poor insight into illness is rooted in the nature of the patients’ self-disorders and the related articulation of psychotic symptoms.

5 ( ) Patients with schizophrenia may also exhibit self-representational problems. These are, however, largely consequential to the basic ipseity disorder. By contrast, self-repre sensational problems alone, as encountered in, say, personality disorders, do not seem to imply any disorders of ipseity.

Josef Paras Josef Paras MD, Danish National Research Foundation's Center for Subjectivity Re search, University of Copenhagen and Psychiatric Center Hvidovre, Copenhagen.

Mads Gram Henriksen Selfhood and Its Disorders Mental Health Center Glostrup, University Hospital of Copenhagen Selfhood and Its Disorders Mental Health Center Glostrup, University Hospital of Copenhagen Vital Anxiety Vital Anxiety Maria Ins Lopez-Igor and Julia Picasso Zapping The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Anxiety is an ambiguous word, it is used to describe a feeling, a clinical symptom, but it is also a disorder or a group of disorders (anxiety disorder). Anxiety is related to our inch mate relationship with ceasing to exist, with nothingness, with the limits of human be Dings. The problem of anxiety is intimately related to hope, because there is no human or psychological situation worse than despair. To know the meaning of anguish and anxiety helps to know mankind. From a phenomenological perspective, vital anxiety is a vital feel ing, with the same characteristics as other vital feelings such as those of well-being, dis comfort, or vertigo. They are feelings that express our way of “being in the world”. In this chapter, the concepts of anxiety and phenomenology of vital anxiety will be reviewed, as well as the point when a normal feeling turns into a pathological one, because the trans son between a vital or mood feeling is of psychopathological interest and it is important to understand mood and anxiety disorders.

Keywords: anxiety, vital anxiety, anguish, clinical symptom, emotions, feeling, phenomenology # Introduction The great problem of present human beings is to have turned the meaning of life into problematic. That’s why it is not strange that obstacles and setbacks of daily living appear wrapped in an atmosphere of anxiety. Juan José Lopez-Igor.

ANXIETY is an ambiguous word, it is used to describe a feeling, a clinical symptom, and it is also a disorder by itself or a group of disorders.

It is a normal feeling that arises when a person believes themself to be endangered by an as yet unidentified threat or danger and, as a result of it, an increased state of alertness and exploratory attention is triggered. An emotional reaction also appears in order to pro Sect ourselves from the danger.

Vital Anxiety Anxiety is a feeling and, as such, it is not just a pure psychological phenomenon. It con Fists also in bodily manifestations, in physiological correlates of emotions (tachycardia, blood pressure modifications, sweating, and so on). These emotions are linked to a cook ing sensation, oppression in the chest, and shortness of breath. Anxiety can be different ted from anguish by feelings of inhibition (as in anguish) or on the contrary, feelings of uneasiness or nervousness (as in anxiety).

It is a clinical symptom that appears in many diseases, not only in mental disorders (e.g. metabolic or cardiological conditions, cancer, and others). In medicine, symptoms are signs of an illness but in psychiatry this concept applies only partially—sometimes sump toms are the extremes of a trait conceived as dimensions, as for instance in the case of anxiety or in personality disorders. A patient suffers from an anxiety disorder when “anti ety and excessive worry (apprehensive anticipation) are present, preventing the patient from controlling the situation and when it is also accompanied by somatic symptoms such as restlessness, feeling trapped, fatigue, irritability and also persist for a while (DSM-5 2013; ICD-10 1992).

During the first half of the twentieth century the hypothesis of the origin of the meaning of anxiety was very much influenced by psychoanalytic theories.

(p. 476) Freud changed his perspective of the concept of anxiety. Before 1926 he consed red that there were two different types of anxiety: a real anxiety and a neurotic one. A real anxiety exists, it is produced by the perception of a real danger, whereas a neurotic anxiety is the consequence of the repression of the libido or the libidinous energies. After 1929 he considered that anxiety dissociative identity disorder not come from the repression of the libidinous in stints but that it was the very cause or reason of repression. Anxiety was at the very ori gin of psychic conflict. That is to say, he interpreted anguish almost as an adaptive rec son to a concrete situation, putting the individual in a state of alert and thus allowing them to avoid danger.

Neurosis was considered from a psychoanalytic point of view as an equivalent of anxiety and its symptoms secondary to it.

Freud highlighted this relationship between sadness ( traurig ), mourning ( Truer ), and being sad ( Traurigkeit ), and the differentiation of anxiety when confronted to a dan ger.

Sadness is not a threat (as in anxiety) but a loss (psychic trauma, in psychoanalytic Fermi nology) or currently stress (in the context of other research studies, defined by the feel ing that one does not have control). In depression a new element is added, which is the sensation of having no escape, the feeling of not having a solution, the resignation to a Bait accompli. If losses are changes it is because a loss has to be replaced, in a process able to maintain the psychic balance. Freud considered that anguish was the base of all neuroses, something endogenous and not reactive to any situation.

Vital Anxiety However, and at the same time, there were other theories coming from phenomenology and from existentialism that tried to explain the meaning of anxiety.

As substantiated by phenomenological and existentialist schools of thought (Kierkegaard, Heidegger (1968/2002), and other philosophers, considered anxiety ( Angst in Ger man) as the basic radical of human condition.

For Heidegger Angst is the expression of the authentic existence, of Casein confronting the fact of being-thrown-into-the-world.

For Kurt Schneider (1959 ) delusions in depressed patients are the manifestation of Essen ital anxieties (Ur-ängste ) of humankind: 1) the loss of health as a threat to physical in tegrity and survival (hypochondriac delusions); 2) economic losses as the threat of subsist Fence (delusions of poverty); and 3) losing the opportunity to access paradise due to a sin ful existence (delusions of guilt).

Anxiety and Anguish Anxiety and anguish share the same etymology, the Latin word angŭstĭa, “narrowness,” “critical situation,” derived from angŭstŭs “narrow,” “strangle,” “choke.” Anxiety derives from the Latin anxĭetas, “craving,” “aspiration,” “worry,” “embarrassment,” and was in Produced in modern languages through the French antiété. Both angŭstĭa and anxĭetas derive from the Ancient Greek άγχω ( ángo ), “to strangle,” “to press tight.” In the course of time angŭstĭa and anxĭetas have been differentiated based on course, evolution, the presence or nature of somatic manifestations, the depth of the feeling, and other charac teristics.

(p. 477) In most Roman languages anguish is a more profound feeling than anxiety and is experienced as a constriction of the throat or the chest that inhibits and hinders the active ity. The expression of anxiety is related to the respiratory system, to the act of breathing, and not so much to the heart, as is the case with anguish. Anxiety conveys the impulse to liberate oneself from the threat. For that reason, the feeling of relief when anxiety has ended is a sigh ( Lewis 1970–71; Dolby 1993; Eisner 1930). The philosopher Zubiri, much on the same line of thought, has put the emphasis on the concept of expectancy.

Lopez-Igor has associated the words sobrecogimiento and sobresalto to two primitive defense reflexes to face a danger: the Totstellung reflex (death feigning reflex, death feint) present in the mimetic behavior of the animal which tries to disappear from the eyes of the predator and the Bewegungssturm (movement storm or tempest, instinct flurry) of poultry in the henhouse when they fly frightened by some danger. Both were de Ascribed by Kretschmer (1958/1960) as reflexes underlying hysterical symptoms and Lopez-Igor extended the metaphor to all neurotic manifestations.

Vital Anxiety Nowadays anxiety and anguish are used to describe analogue and often interchangeable mood states. In French anxieté and angoisse were, until 150 years ago, synonymous. They share the feeling of fear being threatened by a non-identified cause ( Lewis 1970–71; American Psychiatric Association 2013; WHO 1992).

A patient described it as follows: I felt very bad for months, very sad and wanting to die. I’m also very nervous. I can’t explain it very well... I would say that I have an awe, a feeling of internal restlessness that paralyzes and blocks me, does`t allow me to think clearly... It is as if I have a lump in my throat or in my stomach. Sometimes I also have palpi Cations and I get dizzy. And I cry a lot, but it does`t comfort me. I feel like this during the whole day, the only time I’m okay is when I sleep.

Vital Anxiety Feelings are difficult to describe. Descartes considered them as confused thoughts, and other philosophers as rudiments of the reflective conscience before besom ing conscious. Pascal started a tradition in which Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and Freud stand out, that recovers the importance of the feelings, and of the non-rational as Sects of human nature.

The concept of vital anxiety as a disturbance of vital feelings was introduced by Kurt Sch eider (1959 ) following Max Schemer’s description of four types of feelings: 1. Sensory feelings ( Sinnliche Gefühle ), or feeling-sensations ( Empfindungsgefühle ) concerning specific parts of the body, such as pain, a knot in the stomach due to hunger or cold on the back from fear.

2. Vital feelings ( Lebensgefühle ), or body feelings ( Leibgefühle ) concerning body ex perience as a whole such as distress or wellbeing.

3. Psychic feelings ( seelische Gefühle ) or pure feelings of the Ego ( Heine Ich Gefühle ), corresponding to the environment and external world. They are reactive to external circumstances such a joyfulness, enjoyment, sadness or despair.

(p. 478) 4. Spiritual feelings ( geistige Gefühle ) or feelings of the personality ( Perchön lichkeitsgefühle ), which are spontaneous, absolute beyond specific values, such as ecstasy or agony.

Vital feelings are those that allow us to feel our own life, in health and in illness, and the values of the world that surrounds us. The first to use the term “vital feeling” was Sheller—“a characteristic of cenesthesia, a vital feeling,” that is to say, it is not located nor captured with precision, nor has it a quality as marked as other sensations.

Vital Anxiety Lopez-Igor Sr. came to the conclusion that anxiety which characterizes neurotic disorders was a vital and not a psychic or reactive feeling, thus introducing the concept of “vital anxiety.” Vital anxiety is a vital feeling with the same characteristics as other vital feelings such as those of well-being, discomfort, or vertigo. That is, global feelings that express our way of “being-in-the-world.”

He considered that there was no disease able to reveal more of the mystery of life than melancholy itself, claiming that “those who have been free of it, have never experienced real suffering”.

The transition between a vital or a mood feeling is important and is of great psychopath logical interest. In the case of anxiety there is a getting anxious, an emotional reactive feeling (something has happened to me that has caused anxiety) and an anxious, vital, non-reactive feeling (perhaps nothing has happened or nothing has happened that we can attribute it to), and an anxious being, which denotes a temperamental tinge more closely tied to personality.

Phenomenology of Vital Anxiety Anxiety is related to our intimate relationship with ceasing to exist, with nothingness, with the clear limits that derive from the very nature of human beings.

The purest forms of anxiety are fear of death and fear of madness (of losing control), which are the manifestations of experiencing the threat of vanishing either physically or psychologically.

Anxiety differs from fear in that anxiety is always felt before the unknown and fear ap pears before the known, and that is why in the latter the emotional impact is less. On the contrary, fear ( Phobos in Greek) arises when threatened by something concrete and den tidied, anything can produce fear and therefore the catalog of phobias is an endless list. For Jasper, there are a lot of people who seem to live fearlessly, because they lack imagination.

On the contrary, anxiety arises in the midst of the inexplicable, where the danger that threatens is vague and indeterminate.

Anxiety does not appear in front of a specific object, essentially it appears in front of everything and in front of nothing, which is why we should not speak of an anxiety rec son but rather of a situation of anxiety—one feels fear but also anxiety, every form of anx Piety can be reduced to two radicals: death or insanity.

Other authors go a step further and consider that human beings cannot live without anti ety. Gebssatel (1966 ) wrote: “We are as doubtful whether we really want a life without anxiety as we are certain that we want a life without fear.”

Vital Anxiety (p. 479) The first thing we do is to seek an explanation to relieve ourselves from that anti ety, that is, to know why the illness, pain, and suffering caused by any disease is related to the threat of being ill and the possibility of death.

The problem of anxiety is intimately related to hope, because there is no human or psy chological situation worse than despair.

We ask ourselves about the meaning of our illnesses, sometimes we try to link them to traumatic childhood events or previous painful experiences. The need to find a meaning for disease often comes from the need to deny transcendence. If we attribute disease to genes or to traumatic experiences or to any previous fact of life, we will not need to re sort to the sense of transcendence to explain the meaning of disease.

Disease exists, and it exists because human beings are fragile, because they are “being for death” as defined by existentialists. Precisely for this reason, when human beings be come sick and start asking questions, anxiety appears: “every sick person is deep down an anxious person”.

What has to be done to maintain the hope of an ill person is to transform the meaning of their life, to let them go back to considering themselves belonging to the world. The world exists as long as we exist and we are in contact with it.

Normal and Pathological Anxiety The concept of mental disorders, like many others concept in medicine, philosophy, and science, lacks a consistent definition capable of covering all situations. No definition is able to establish a precise boundary between normality and psychopathology. Psychiatric nosology has been turning around different categorical or dimensional models for the last two hundred years, and the problem is that symptoms cannot be confounded with jag Gnostic criteria.

The two main problems for the clinician and the researcher are the limits between nor mal and morbid psychological experiences; and the differences between anxiety and de precision, even if these boundaries may sometimes be blurred.

In psychoanalysis the difference between normal and pathological anxiety was not taken into account, perhaps because Freud always wanted to make a psychopathology of daily life. Psychic anxiety cannot be equated to normal anxiety, nor can vital anxiety be equated to neurotic anxiety because vital feelings (including anxiety and sadness) are part of daily life, in which the four strata of sentimental life are or may be present, as de Ascribed by Schemer (1972 ). Feelings are states of the self-incarnated in a corporeality (liv ing body, incarnated soul, in our own world).

Vital Anxiety Humans, described by Heidegger, live inauthentically, forgetting or ignoring what human life is, which means, we live our lives as far as possible ignoring the idea of death. But life cannot be imagined without the inexorable presence of death, disease is the im age of that limit of our existence.

Normal anxiety differs from pathological anxiety in intensity, being experienced more at the psychic level, and the pathological one is somatized (with headaches, palpitations, tremors, and dizziness). It is also differentiated by its Aphasic evolution and by its relative independence from the environment and biographical factors (p. 480) For Lopez-Igor the difference between vital and normal anxiety relied on another dimension; on the defense mechanisms they set in motion (phobias, obsessions, and conversational symptoms among others) that are not so striking in normal distress.

As Maj recently pointed out it is not always easy to establish when a depression becomes a mental disorder. He proposed three approaches: the first one is the need to take into account the context in which depression occurs; the second is that there is a qualitative difference between sadness and depression—in depression anhedonia is one of the main diagnostic criteria but it does not appear in sadness; and the third one is a rag masc approach that considers a continuum for sadness in clinical depression.

Vital Anxiety as a Form of Neurosis The harmony of sentimental life in people suffering from a neurosis or those who are melancholic is lost, becoming dominated by vital feelings, which drown the rest.

The core of melancholic experience is the inability to experience or to feel sadness or what is the same: vital sadness, not reactive to daily life events. In the same way, a neu Erotic person is incapable of feeling anxiety, because everything is anxiety, and symptoms appear that are nothing other than the expression of the failure of their corporeality, which ceases to be silent and produces a heart that beats so hard it seems it is going to burst, lungs that prevent us from breathing, or complaints about the impossibility of do ing or undoing.

At the beginning, patients do not articulate their distress but instead complain about headaches, trembling, or palpitations. They experience pathological anxiety not only as an uneasiness, and as a diffuse pain linked to the experience of corporeality but as some thing tied to different parts of their own bodies. It is located in specific places (e.g. epi gastrium, throat, etc.) or in more psychological aspects such as phobias. From this point of view, vital anxiety may be seen as a mixture of Censorial feeling and vital feeling.

The experience of anxiety is an experience of (sometimes unbearable) limits and when it ceases it can focus on something concrete that the subject identifies as “the cause” of anxiety. This way the appearance and creation of phobias can be understood, as phobias Vital Anxiety are a tendency to the chronification of anxiety and this anxiety itself will generate more anxiety, and the fear of anxiety is already anxiety.

For persons suffering from a neurotic disorder, the experience of death is lived as an “en counter with nothingness,” with something that is outside, an emptiness into which the person falls. Anxiety, related to death and particularly, anxiety related to madness, or anx Piety related to nothing in general, are experienced by each person in a typical and partic Alar way. In pathological anxiety all this acquires a different nuance and is related to fear of situations, closer to everyday life events and gives rise to anxiety attacks.

At present, the terms anguish and anxiety are used as if they had similar meanings. In DSM-5 both would be encompassed in the concept of Generalized Anxiety Visor der (300.02), characterized by an excessive and disproportionate preoccupation, lasting for some time, with individuals feeling loss of control. Also present were daily aspects such as personal or family health, personal finances, work situation, household tasks, etc., which in principle should only trigger a consequent concern or worries. However, this way of (p. 481) experiencing reality generates in the person such psychic and even physical discomfort (in the form of somatizations), that it may even determine the perform Dance of their daily activities, leading to their being unable to function with immediacy and efficiency (as their unmeasured concern demands practically all their attention), and being unable to put those thoughts aside to deal with other situations of higher priority. They also suffer from somatizaciones like tremors, cramps or muscular pains, nausea, profuse sweating, diarrhea, and other symptoms also related to stress, such as irritable bowel syndrome or cephaleas.

Conclusion The term vital anxiety has passed into colloquial language as the anxiety that arises in the face of everyday events. Existential philosophy speaks of “being-in-theworld,” in Spanish this relationship is well understood because we have two different verbs for being ( ser and star ), which make those variations of the way of being-in-theworld well understandable. Being-in-the-world, being well or being unhappy, being happy or sad or being distressed.

In the end, anxiety and anguish are nuances of the same experience. In principle anguish is deeper, more visceral and constrictive, whilst anxiety is more related to breathing dis comfort. In both cases there is fear about the dissolution of the unit and continuity of the self (anguish) and when what exists is not a fear but only a threat, anxiety appears. An gush offers a more agonizing background, where that agony may be understood as a struggle against life itself, against disease, and against death.

During an anxiety attack everything is possible when control over the self is lost, and therefore anything can happen when the relationship of trust between the self and the Vital Anxiety world is lost, with patients sometimes describing sometimes that what they feel as “fear of the fear” or feeling that they are going to die.

A feeling like vital anxiety becomes pathological when mechanisms that cause a restrict son of freedom and a loss of self-realization possibilities appear.

To know the meaning of anguish and anxiety helps us to know mankind. Consciousness and thought are the most specific of human functions, in which all other functions con verge and are framed into. They allow us to understand what happens in the world and with oneself (consciousness) and to give it a meaning. First comes the emotional con science and after, the reflective one, the specific human capacity to raise oneself above a situation and to consider it, taking at the same time consideration over oneself, from a distance, as Guarding said, and it is this taking distance that allows us to value our Bela son with the world, with ourselves, and with our history.

Vital Anxiety Freud S.. Letter to Richard Flatter. Psychoanalysis and Shakespeare. New York. Octagon Books. Gebsatell, E. von Antropología Médica. Madrid: Rial. Heidegger M. (1968/2002). “Was heist Denken?” Gesamtausgabe, Bd. 8. Vittorio Kloster Mann, Frankfurt a. M. “What Is Called Thinking?” trans. J. Glenn Gray. New York: Harper & Row. Jasper K..

Filosofía de la Existencia. Barcelona: Aguilar. Kierkegaard S.. Concept of Dread, trans. Walter Cowrie. Princeton: Princeton Uni varsity Press. Kretschmer E. (1958/1960). Hysteria, Reflex und Instinct [Hysteria, Reflex, and Instinct]. New York: Philosophical Library. Lewis A.. “The Ambiguous Word ‘Anxiety’.” International Journal of Psychiatry 9: 62–79. Lopez-Igor J. J..

La Angustia Vital. Madrid: Paz Montalvo. Lopez-Igor J. J.. “Basic Anxiety as the Core of Neurosis.” Alta Psychiatric Scandi Java 41: 329–332. Lopez-Igor J. J.. Las neurosis Como enfermedades del ánimo. Madrid: Credos. Lopez-Igor J. J.. El lenguaje de la medicine y su mutual integración con otros lenguajes. Un paradigm para la ciencia de consecuencias sociopolíticas. Madrid: Real Academia de Doctors de España. Lopez-Igor J. J., Ortiz Alfonso T., and Lopez-Igor M. I..

Lecciones de Psicologia Médica. Barcelona: Mason. Lopez-Igor J. J. and Lopez-Igor M. I.. “Anxiety and Logos: Toward a Linguistic Analysis of the Origins of Human Thinking.” Journal of Effective Disorders 120 January: 1–11. Lopez-Igor J. J and Lopez-Igor M. I.. “Paving the Way for New Research Strategies in Mental Disorders. Second Part: The Light at the End of the Tunnel.” 41: 67–75. Lopez-Igor M. I.. Depresión o tristeza; ¿Dónde está el límite? Julio: Real Academia de Doctors de España. Maj M.. “When does a Depression become a Mental Disorder?” British Journal Psy chiatry 199: 85–86. Pascal L.. Bras completes. Paris: Editions Gallimard.

Vital Anxiety Freud S.. Letter to Richard Flatter. Psychoanalysis and Shakespeare. New York. Octagon Books. Gebsatell, E. von Antropología Médica. Madrid: Rial. Heidegger M. (1968/2002). “Was heist Denken?” Gesamtausgabe, Bd. 8. Vittorio Kloster Mann, Frankfurt a. M. “What Is Called Thinking?” trans. J. Glenn Gray. New York: Harper & Row. Jasper K..

Filosofía de la Existencia. Barcelona: Aguilar. Kierkegaard S.. Concept of Dread, trans. Walter Cowrie. Princeton: Princeton Uni varsity Press. Kretschmer E. (1958/1960). Hysteria, Reflex und Instinct [Hysteria, Reflex, and Instinct]. New York: Philosophical Library. Lewis A.. “The Ambiguous Word ‘Anxiety’.” International Journal of Psychiatry 9: 62–79. Lopez-Igor J. J..

La Angustia Vital. Madrid: Paz Montalvo. Lopez-Igor J. J.. “Basic Anxiety as the Core of Neurosis.” Alta Psychiatric Scandi Java 41: 329–332. Lopez-Igor J. J.. Las neurosis Como enfermedades del ánimo. Madrid: Credos. Lopez-Igor J. J.. El lenguaje de la medicine y su mutual integración con otros lenguajes. Un paradigm para la ciencia de consecuencias sociopolíticas. Madrid: Real Academia de Doctors de España. Lopez-Igor J. J., Ortiz Alfonso T., and Lopez-Igor M. I..

Lecciones de Psicologia Médica. Barcelona: Mason. Lopez-Igor J. J. and Lopez-Igor M. I.. “Anxiety and Logos: Toward a Linguistic Analysis of the Origins of Human Thinking.” Journal of Effective Disorders 120 January: 1–11. Lopez-Igor J. J and Lopez-Igor M. I.. “Paving the Way for New Research Strategies in Mental Disorders. Second Part: The Light at the End of the Tunnel.” 41: 67–75. Lopez-Igor M. I.. Depresión o tristeza; ¿Dónde está el límite? Julio: Real Academia de Doctors de España. Maj M.. “When does a Depression become a Mental Disorder?” British Journal Psy chiatry 199: 85–86. Pascal L.. Bras completes. Paris: Editions Gallimard.

Vital Anxiety (p. 483) Harbin T. R.. “Ontology Recapitulates Philology. The Mythic Nature of Anti ety.” American Psychology 23: 411–418. Schemer M.. El resentimiento en la moral. Caparros. Barcelona: Colección Spirit. Schneider K.. Clinical Psychopathology. New York: Rune and Stratton. World Health Organization. The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva: World Health Organ Cation. Yonkers K. A, Warsaw M. G, Passion A. O., and Keller M. B.. “Phenomenology and Course of Generalized Anxiety Disorder.” British Journal of Psychiatry 168: 308–313. Zubiri tenth.. “Las Fuentes espirituales de la angustia y la Esperanza.” Revista Las noamericana de Teología 8/22: 91–97.

Maria Ins Lopez-Igor Faculty of Medicine, Complutense University of Madrid and Juan José Lopez Igor Foundation Julia Picasso Zapping Psychiatric Department Faculty of Medicine, Complutense University of Madrid Vital Anxiety (p. 483) Harbin T. R.. “Ontology Recapitulates Philology. The Mythic Nature of Anti ety.” American Psychology 23: 411–418. Schemer M.. El resentimiento en la moral. Caparros. Barcelona: Colección Spirit. Schneider K.. Clinical Psychopathology. New York: Rune and Stratton. World Health Organization. The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva: World Health Organ Cation. Yonkers K. A, Warsaw M. G, Passion A. O., and Keller M. B.. “Phenomenology and Course of Generalized Anxiety Disorder.” British Journal of Psychiatry 168: 308–313. Zubiri tenth.. “Las Fuentes espirituales de la angustia y la Esperanza.” Revista Las noamericana de Teología 8/22: 91–97.

Maria Ins Lopez-Igor Faculty of Medicine, Complutense University of Madrid and Juan José Lopez Igor Foundation Julia Picasso Zapping Psychiatric Department Faculty of Medicine, Complutense University of Madrid Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness Aaron Mishara and Yuliya Zaytseva The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jan 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter examines whether hallucinations are related to the problem of phenomenal consciousness and how historical contributions to the phenomenology of hallucinations, notably the Early Heidelberg School, shed light on hallucinations in schizo phrenia. We focus specifically on Mayer-Gross, who in his phenomenological analysis of hallucinations during psychosis, drew from studies conducted with colleagues in Heidel berg: 1. Hypnagogic experiences (i.e., between waking and sleep); 2. Mescaline as a mod el-psychosis in the 1920’s with particular relationship to the self-disturbances; 3. Detailed accounts by persons with schizophrenia. In heated debates with colleagues (Berle, Jasper, C. Schneider, Stiröder, Specht, Wernicke) Mayer-Gross concluded that hallucina sons in schizophrenia may be considered part of the self-disturbances (later contributing to K. Schneider’s First Rank Symptoms). Shifts in the organization of consciousness play a role. However, hallucinations develop from non-conscious low-level sensory anomalies and a disrupted perception action cycle. The chapter concludes with an assessment of how the Early Heidelberg School contributes to today’s phenomenology of hallucinations.

Keywords: hallucinations, phenomenal consciousness, phenomenology of hallucinations, Early Heidelberg School, schizophrenia, Wilhelm Mayer-Gross, pseudohallucinations, psychosis, multimodal hallucinations, self-disturb Dances (Ichstörungen) thought insertion, reflex hallucinations # The Early Heidelberg School and the Phenom # nology of Hallucinations IN this chapter, we examine the problem of phenomenal consciousness and how historical contributions to the phenomenology of hallucinations, especially the early Heidelberg School, have relevance for our current understanding of hallucinations in schizophrenia. We will focus on the work of Mayer-Gross but will also have occasion to re fer to other Early Heidelberg School members, Bringer, Gruhle, and Jasper.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness In his phenomenological analysis, Mayer-Gross examines the claim of his contemporaries that the problem of consciousness is at the heart of the enigma of hallucinations. Follow ing Jasper (1913a), Mayer-Gross is particularly critical of theories which do not base themselves on phenomenological data. That is, he contests the theories of his contemporaries, who theorize about consciousness but do not assign a proper role to the perceptual changes underlying hallucinations in schizophrenia (an ar gument we briefly summarize here).

Mayer-Gross may be regarded as herald of the “perceptual anomalies” approach to schizo ophrenia, the view that low-level perceptual anomalies play a critical role in the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, including verbal and non-verbal hallucinations, the various thought disturbances, and self-disturbances/disorders ( Ichstörungen ). The phenomena logically-oriented psychiatrists Matussek, Conrad, and Binswanger later developed this view.

(p. 485) The Contested Pseudohallucination # (Kandinsky, Jasper, Barrios, and Dining)

Following the German psychiatrist Haven and the Russian psychiatrist Kandinsky, who himself experienced hallucinations, Jasper (1913a) distinguishes hallucinations proper or genuine hallucinations from pseudohallucinations. While Haven was the first to use the term “pseudohallucination” (to refer to illusory experiences falsely labeled “halloo citations”), previous variations of the concept had been circulating in nineteenth-century French psychiatry. For example, Baillarger’s “psychic hallucinations” pre-date, but conceptually resemble Haven’s pseudohallucinations. They are based on involuntary im ages and memories and are opposed to “psychosensorial hallucinations” in which the sen Cory component prevails.

1 The Russian psychiatrist Kandinsky described his own hallucina Cory experiences in detail. He diagnosed himself as having primäre Verrücktheit (German for primary insanity), which Barrios and Dining (1996 ) comment, “could be translated anachronistically as ‘schizophrenia-like state’ ”).

Kandinsky defined pseudohallucinations (PHs) as “subjective perceptions similar to hallucinations, with respect to their character and vividness, but they differ because 2 they are not experienced as having objective reality”. PHs may accompany normal perceptions of objects, in a similar way to how memories or fantasies coexist in our con sciousness with real perceptions. PHs are vivid images which are experienced as subject Dive, anomalous, or novel. They arise involuntarily, cannot be controlled, and change rapidly. The individual, however, may not always be able to disentangle the pseudohalluci natory image from the perceptual experience. Kandinsky writes: “In visual PHs, the im age arises effortlessly in front of the person’s gaze without participation of will”. They may be projected outside and for this reason appear to stand in front of the eyes. In Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness auditory PHs, Kandinsky writes, “the patients sometimes state that they hear voices not with their ears but with an inner ear and call these experiences ‘hearing with the soul’, ‘an inner voice’, ‘speaking the language of the soul’ ”.

(p. 486) According to Kandinsky, consciousness is preserved in cases of PHs except during hypnogogic and oneroid states. An interesting example of PHs are transparent hallucina Cory images that have contours which do not block the real objects but remain connected with them (for instance, “the transparent man enters the door or gets inside through the 3 window”.

Kandinsky suggests that visual hypnagogic states in healthy people qualify as PHs. “Act ally, the lively fantastic pictures experienced by healthy people before going to sleep, or in a state between sleep and wakefulness, may be characterized as PHs. These are not separate figures in the objective field of view, but complex pictures, occupying the whole visual field”. In contrast, panoramic hallucinations of the mentally ill during wake foulness, or persons under hypnosis, where one feels transported into another place, are not PHs. In these cases, fantastic pictures completely replace the real environment in which the hallucinating subject dwells.

Some authors identify PHs as dominating the clinical presentation. The state of hallucinosis, for instance, encompasses disturbances in perception and has inner projection but is provoked by the environment. Such PHs are projected inside the head (e.g. an inner voice) or seen in the external space, sometimes referred to by the individ ual as being seen by the brain, not with the eyes.

Occurring against the will, PHs are experienced as independent from the conscious mind. As Kandinsky reports on his own experiences of pseudohallucination: “Appearing sponta neously, the images can neither be changed nor expelled from consciousness”.

In his approach to hallucinations, Jasper (1911, 1912, 1913a ) proposed a strict distinct son between perception, in which the phenomenal givenness of the object is experienced as objectively present ( leibhaftig) from representations based on imaginary constructions 4 (what Jasper calls imaginary, bildhaftig ). He proposed that this distinction rests on the broader opposition between perception ( Wahrnehmung ) and idea or image ( Vorstellung ). That is, perceptions generally have the character of being objectively present ( Lab haftigkeit ), whereas the idea or representation of objects is imaginary ( Bildhaftigkeit ). Genuine or true hallucinations ( Trug-wahrnehmungen, i.e. deceptive perceptions) are ex perienced as “objectively” present ( leibhaftig ), and may be experienced alongside real perceptions. In contrast, pseudohallucinations (deceptive images or ideas, Trug-vorstel lunge) are experienced as imaginary, or subjective (i.e. not real). While the former oc curs in “external objective space,” the pseudohallucinations occur in “inner subjective 5 space.” Pseudohallucinations are not concretely real, have the character of subjectivity, and appear in inner subjective space. The (p. 487) pseudohallucination has been criticized for both conceptual confusion and lack of clinical utility.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness # Mayer-Gross and the Early Heidelberg School: # Disruption of the Embodied Self in its Relation # ship to the Hallucinatory Object While Mayer-Gross acknowledges indebtedness to Jasper in his own phenomenological approach, he opposes Jasper’s strict distinction between “genuine” versus “pseudo” hal lucinations. By proposing a dialectical relationship between these terms, Mayer-Gross deconstructs Jasper’s strict opposition. Anticipating the later criticisms by Barrios and Dining Mayer-Gross observes that no matter how attractive or fashionable the term “ Leibhaftigkeit ” might have become in German psychiatry at the time, it remains ambiguous. The mere absence of Leibhaftigkeit does not properly distinguish PHs from “true” hallucinations.

Mayer-Gross cites his contemporary A. A. Grünbaum, an Amsterdam psychiatrist, who describes an experience that challenges Jasper’s sharp opposition between “object Dive” perception (i.e. genuine hallucination) and subjective image (pseudohallucination): Following a taxing day, Grünbaum attends a not particularly stimulating concert. He finds the conductor “boring” and experiences himself falling into a half-sleep. “I am still hearing the musical tones but now as if behind a thick wall. After shutting my eyes for a while, I see the orchestra in a most remarkable manner. The orchestra was suddenly without distance to my body-self ( Lab-Ich ). The sizes of the different instruments and ob Sects were especially odd. Their dimensions appeared differently than usual. Still, their unusual sizes, being smaller or larger, dissociative identity disorder not surprise me nor put me on guard”.

Then, through a sudden jerk, Grünbaum is thrown back into wakefulness. He observes that “the transition back to the complete, conscious perception brought about a spatial reorganization of the entire scene... I experienced how quickly the actual distance to the orchestra returned and how the various figures resumed their correct sizes.... At the same time I knew that just a moment before, everything had been different”.

Grünbaum comments that, unlike Jasper’s definition, the “pseudohallucination” here does not occur in an “inner subjective space” which is opposed to the “external ob jective space” of the “perceptual (or genuine) hallucination” as Jasper sug Bests. Rather, in the pseudohallucination (in this case, hypnagogic image), there is a loss of distance between the visual image or hallucination and the body-self ( Lab-Ich ). The hallucination (p. 488) does not occur in inner subjective space, but appears, no matter how disordered, in the surrounding space. Grünbaum (1917 ) comments: “I nevertheless knew that I had the orchestra in front of me and not merely a vision”. That is, con tra Jasper, the experience was pervaded with its own “objective” character, its own Lab haftigkeit.

Moreover, the experience “cannot be placed in specific spatial relationship to other per ceptual objects” ( Grünbaum 1917: 108). In the loss of distance, the relation between fore ground and background is disturbed. The loss of distance between the visual image or Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness hallucination and body-self ( Lab-Ich ) resembles – as indicated below – other anomalous relationships to the hallucinatory object including temporal, sensorimotor, and embodied processes of self.

The Loss of the Ability to Explore/Transcend # the Hallucination: Spatial, Temporal, and Sen # sorimotor Relationships to the Hallucinatory # Object The phenomenological psychiatrist, Erwin Straps (1978; Mishara 1995) observes that we experience distance not in terms of objective space but in terms of our own momentary ability for movement. The loss of the embodied, sensorimotor relationship to the halluci natory object in space, time, and background (including other objects in the field) may not be specific to the pseudohallucination. Grünbaum experienced what he calls a pseudo-image ( Pseudovorstellung ) as directly related to his world (thus perceiving a 6 world with “eyes behind the eyes”). By deconstructing the oppositions that characterize Jasper’s psychopathology, we come across a feature shared by different modalities of hallucinations in psychosis, that is, the loss of embodied relationship to the hallucinatory object. This disrupts the “object’s” relationship to other objects in the background, as in the “fragmented” space of Grünbaum’s hallucination (for more recent discussions con corning the importance of the relationship between hallucinatory and hallucination, see Coda section, below).

(p. 489) As suggested by Grünbaum’s abrupt return to wakefulness from half-sleep, there are transitions in a self-organizing embodied, experiential field which emerge with shift ing levels of consciousness (von Wei'säOcker 1950a). These are efforts to maintain gestalt coherence in ongoing perception action cycle. As von Wei'säOcker (director of the Heidel berg neurology clinic at the time) indicates in his sense-physiological and phenomenology cal experiments—well known to Mayer-Gross and the Early Heidelberg School—these transitions are rapid and ballistic in that each abrupt new organization of the surround ing field appears to emerge on its own without precedent in the prior organization. For example, Grünbaum wakens from his hypnagogic experience with a sudden jerk accompa Died by a rapid recovery of spatial distance to the orchestra. Wei'säOcker (1950a) calls each embodied subjective act, “improvisation.” The spontaneous emergence of a new em bodied field-organization sets the conditions for the total field to maintain inner ocher Once as a system. The strategies to maintain coherence are not consciously generated but appear to emerge effortlessly and automatically in the service of preserving the self– world relationship as coherently meaningful (see Uhlhaas and Mishara 2007; Giersch and 7 Mishara 2017a, 2017b; Mishara 2011).

As suggested, the hallucinatory object not only takes an independence from self in its spontaneous emergence, but also from the background: there appears to be little or no relationship between the subject’s body movements and how the hallucinatory object re Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness Deals itself (see Kaminsky et al. in review ). That is, the hallucination may involve a disrupt son of the tight coupling of perception and action. It has been hypothesized that this may be due to a discrepancy in the timing of this coupling, and/or the anomalous timing of low-level perceptual processing in very brief, millisecond duration.

For Mayer-Gross, the hallucinations that occur in fragmentary space are highly salient compared to other perceptual objects. That is, the features of Grünbaum’s half-sleep experience are not specific to PHs (or the problem of subjective vs. actual space), but rather resemble at least some visual and multimodal hallucinations during psychosis in that they exhibit the fragmented space which Grünbaum observed in his hypnagogic hallucination. Such fragmentation prohibits sensorimotor exploration of the hallucinatory object and, as a result, separates the hallucination from its perceptual background. That is, to the extent that movement is unable to explore the object by view ing or experiencing it from different sides, the result is a detachment between the halluci natory object and background. Anomalies in the timing between perception and move Bent may produce the fragmentation.

Mayer-Gross reports that one of his patients, early in the course of schizophrenia, not on ly sees (hallucinates) houses that are not there during his usual walk; he also does not see other houses, which really are there (hallucination by omission). We return to this idea when we describe the “loss of perspective” of the hallucinatory experience in our conclu ions.

In his phenomenological analyses of psychosis, Mayer-Gross pays particular attention to visual and multimodal hallucinations in schizophrenia (which, he argues, share structural features with the auditory verbal/non-verbal hallucinations). In support of this approach, recent studies, have indicated that when compared with unimodal auditory verbal hallucinations (AVHs), the prevalence of visual (p. 490) and multimodal hallucinations has been vastly underestimated in schizo 8 phrenia and schizophrenia spectrum patients. On a related topic, Upthegrove et al. (2016 ) found that AVHs can be “experienced with additional multisensory factors, include ing pain, pressure and itching.”

Mayer-Gross Challenges Contemporary Tho # Dies of a Core Disturbance (Grundstörung) of # Schizophrenia For Mayer-Gross, one cannot overestimate the role of the perceptual anomalies during the prodrome and subsequent conversion to full blown psychosis in schizophrenia. He lamented that the importance of these anomalies was being ignored by the contempora nous trends. The prevailing view at the time assumed that it was the disruption of high er-level thought processes that was ultimately responsible for many of the symptoms of schizophrenia. Mayer-Gross countered that his contemporaries neglected the phenom Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness nological data which indicated that there can be sensory anomalies without disturbance to thought (e.g. thought insertion, thought withdrawal, thoughts becoming loud (Gedankenlautwerden ), which Mayer-Gross and other members of the Early Heidelberg School counted among the Ichstörungen ). However, this same data dissociative identity disorder not support the converse view that there can be self-disturbances (as defined by the Early Heidelberg School) in higher-level cognition (as, for example, in thought insertion, thought withdraw al, somatic passivity and other “made” feelings, actions, and volition) without some de Cree of anomalous perceptual experiences underlying these phenomena.

Quite the contrary, the abundance of theories at the time suggested that higher-level cog nation was central and low-level perceptual processing played little or no role in schizo phrenia. This was especially problematic when such accounts also claimed to access a theoretical core disturbance (Grundstörung ), from which “everything else could be de rived.”

Both J. Berle and C. Schneider proposed that a reduction in mental activity or conscious Bess was critical in creating the thought disturbances (as described above). Berle describes the fundamental, core disturbance ( Grundstörung ) in schizophrenia to be a “hypotonia of consciousness,” a “primary insufficiency of mental activity.” The psycho logical Grundstörung is primary because the symptoms of psychosis can be derived from it. With the “hypotonia of consciousness,” there is a “deficiency of the waking state,” in which the usual sensations of tension ( Spannungsempfindungen, i.e. mental toxicity) are absent. That is, reduced tone ( hypotonia ) of consciousness is the core disturbance of schizophrenia.

9 In a somewhat similar vein, C. Schneider proposed that “thinking while falling asleep” ( Einschlafdenken ) models the mechanisms responsible for the higher cognitive (p. 491) disturbances in schizophrenia. However, these claims of finding a theoretical Grundstörung were challenged by the early Heidelberg school. Mayer-Gross, Gruhle, and Jasper were emphatically opposed to claims of a theoretical Grundstörung of conscious Bess in schizophrenia, which could not be derived from the phenomenological data. In fact, Berle is himself clear that his view of the Grundstörung as the psychological essence of schizophrenia is theoretical: “The core disturbance ( Grundstörung ) is not available to phenomenology; it can only be inferred from the totality of the primary symptoms”. Berle had observed that with a lowering of the threshold of consciousness (hypotonia), there is a lowering of individual mental acts. However, as Mayer-Gross and Gruhle indicate, Berle had not distinguished mental activity from activity generally, and thus had difficulty ac counting for both the excesses of activity (often at the beginning of illness), and its educ son. Berle’s activity insufficiency may well be a characteristic symptom, but by no means “the cardinal symptom” of schizophrenia. Mayer-Gross cautions that Berle’s concept “los es itself completely in the theoretical.”

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness To counter the theoretical claims of a Grundstörung in schizophrenia, Mayer-Gross and colleagues collected their own phenomenological data on these topics. They implemented a hypnagogic imagery study (where both a becoming sensory of thinking, and increased difficulty thinking ( Denkerschwerung ) were present), the mescaline model-psychosis, as well as their phenomenological analyses of symptoms from clinical cases.

As indicated elsewhere, the Early Hei delberg School originated and developed the concept of the self-disturbances in schizophrenia ( Ichstörungen, also called self-disorders), which even tally contributed to K. Schneider’s formulation of the first-rank symptoms. In the 1920s, Bringer and Mayer-Gross used mescaline as a psychotomimetic agent to study the selfdisturbances. They proposed that the self-disturbances include hallucinations, as hallucinations involve both an alienation from the perceptual world and an inability to detach (gain distance) from the hallucination. These experiences occur independently from the self’s volition, and are often imposed process by foreign, omnipotent agents.

In the self-disturbances of schizophrenia and the model-psychosis (mescaline), Mayer- Gross finds the same fundamental transformations ( gerundsätzlichen Abwandlungen ) of sense perception in its various modalities (visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile, co Anesthetic) and an uncoupling of perception and action: 1. Ability of threshold ( Schwellenlabilität ) (von Wei'säOcker 1950a, b; Mayer-Gross and Stein 1926; Stein and von Wei'säOcker 1927): There is an oversensitity to stimuli in any or all of the sensory domains, that is, fine-detailed, impinging sensory expert Fences, a magnification of salience often until one aspect (or view) completely occur pies consciousness. This may alternate with its opposite, a “reduced ability to detect nuance, as well as dullness, emptiness, coldness, and monotonous environment, which could also indicate a change in threshold” ( Mayer-Gross and Stein 1926: 370).

Here there may be transitions from seeing everything as new and equally important, and brightly (p. 492) colored to a “pallid Frey and the apocalyptic mood that the world is coming to an end” ( Weltuntergangsstimmung ) (Mayer-Gross and Stein 1926: 361).

The world may be covered by a visible green “film” (reported to Aaron Mishara by a person with schizophrenia who was experiencing the early course of schizophrenia) or the artificiality of a stage set, which is experienced as an alienation of the perceptual world ( Entfremdung der Wahrnehmungswelt ).

2. Patients experience fusion with their experience (difficulty to distance or distract from it) and at the same time the experience is found to be completely independent of the self’s own activity or volition (passivity experiences). (Recently, this has been proposed to result from an uncoupling of automatic and controlled processing, poss bly due to very early timing discrepancies.) The changes of sensory experience are “incomparable,” unlike anything ex Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness perienced before. Patients and the mescaline experimental subjects have difficulty finding the descriptive vocabulary for these experiences during psychosis or psy chotomimetic challenge. Gruhle and Mayer-Gross note that patients invent their own vocabulary to describe their experiences.

3. The gestalt-structure of experience may vary from minimal or absent structure to 10 detailed, complexly elaborated experiences in any modality.

4. Uncoupling of perception and action: Movements in self and others may be per caved as abnormally fast or slow. Resting objects may be seen as moving, or move Bents may be seen where there are none or conversely, moving objects may appear as still.

5. Hallucinating may occur in more than one modality at once, what Mayer-Gross calls a “hallucinating together of the senses” ( Zusammenhalluzinieren der Sine ); synesthesias may be present (see Kaminsky et al. in review).

The Debate with Stiröder and Wernicke: Are # Auditory Hallucinations, Thought Insertion, # and Thoughts becoming Loud ( Gedanken # lautwerden ) Related?

As indicated above, Heidelberg psychiatrists Bringer and Mayer-Gross conducted a series of mescaline ex pediments to examine the phenomenology of psychotic experiences, especially the selfdisturbances ( Ichstörungen ), in healthy participants. The participants included medical students and psychiatrists with the goal of becoming more able to empathize with or un derstand those experiences of psychotic patients that Jasper (1913a) had labeled as nonunderstandable. As Jasper emphasizes, these experiences are due to an underlying as yet unknown (p. 493) neurobiological disease process, which interrupts any “understand able” development of personality. For Mayer-Gross, the mescaline experiments were critical in that they “opened the way to explaining these nonempathizable forms of subjective experience, which, up till now, have occasioned very un satisfactory efforts to interpret or theoretically understand these experiences” ( Mayer- Gross and Stein 1926: 386).

Mayer-Gross’s participation and observation of colleagues in the mescaline studies ap pear to have profoundly affected him. He repeatedly emphasizes that when we are talk ing about the perceptual anomalies implicated in hallucinations and the various self-dis turbances, we are talking about experiences that are difficult to articulate because they are so unlike our usual, everyday sensory experiences. The experimental mescaline par ticipants in the mescaline model psychosis study, as also described by individuals in early psychosis, fall into a foreign, never previously experienced state.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness On the basis of his and others’ experiences as participants in the mescaline studies, May er-Gross noted that thoughts in thought insertion (TI) are not ascribed to alien agency, 11 but are rather perceived as alien. He described a “becoming sensory” ( Versinnlichung ) in the sensory representation of thoughts. He states further that we obtain “insight into the progressive invasiveness of the thought-disturbances from the earliest sign of difficulties in concentrating.... These prodromal manifestations lead to a scattered emptiness of thinking, quite similar to thought withdrawal.” In his careful phenomenological analysis of subtle self-perceived cognitive and other disturbances in prodromal schizophrenia and mescaline intoxication, Mayer-Gross anticipated Huber’s basic-symptom concept.

On the basis of his insights, Mayer-Gross finds an opponent in the Leipzig-based psychic Grist, Paul Stiröder, and the latter’s reliance on the celebrated neuropsychiatrist Wer nice for his theory of hallucinations. Both Stiröder and Wernicke claim that thought insertion (TI) is often a precursor in the course of illness to thoughts becoming loud (GLW, Gedankenlautwerden ) and the AVHs. Stiröder concludes that TI, GLW, and AVHs are related symptoms and groups them under the unitary concept “verbal halluci noses.” Stiröder argues that GLW, AVHs, TI, and “the made thoughts and experiences” (Wernicke’s autochthonous ideas), are not based on a percep Dual disturbance but strictly on a verbal-linguistic one (i.e. “phonemes”).

Despite the emphasis on phonemes, Stiröder proposes that the critical element in this symptom-complex is a “feeling of foreignness” ( Fremdheitsgefühl ). He regards the “feel ing of foreignness” as a primary, not further analyzable and not explainable original phe nomenon. Its imposition on the phonemes gives these symptoms their foreign character, an “externalizing” of thoughts. Progressing in sequence from thought insertion to thoughts becoming loud and auditory verbal hallucinations, they involve “a co-speaking, a speaking before, a speaking after, a repeating, or an answering back” ( Stiröder 1928).

Mayer-Gross counters that Stiröder’s “feeling of foreignness” as the not further analyzable original phenomenon of verbal hal lucinosis is theoretical and thus, arbitrary, that is, not based on data secured by (p. 494) phenomenological method. He comments: “To this day we know nothing of the inner in terconnectedness of these symptoms and claims about their essence are presumptuous. Rather, by sticking faithfully to patients’ reports of subjective experience, we consistently find descriptions which clearly go back to the sensory sources... the perceptual atom lies in beginning schizophrenia”. According to Mayer-Gross, what makes the in sorted thought stand out from the patient’s other thoughts is not a “feeling of foreign Bess,” but rather the experience of individual thoughts becoming sensory. This involves a transformed sense of what is experienced as perceptual according to a “functional transformation” ( Stein and von Wei'säOcker 1927; Mayer-Gross and Stein 1928; Bringer and Muffin 1932; Wei'säOcker 1950a,b). That is, the way that the percep Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness son is given is radically altered (the “how” of the experience, which, is “incomparable” to 12 previous perceptual experiences, i.e. a foreign, never previously experienced state).

Mayer-Gross presents the following case as a countered ample to Stiröder’s theory: A 19 year old man (father has schizophrenia) arrived to our clinic in a highly agi Bated and scattered state with pronounced pressure of speech. For the past two months, he no longer goes to work. He reported the following beginning of his psychosis. During the previous night, he slept poorly. There was something Duncan ny in the air. Feeling restless, he whistles through the window and receives an “answer”, someone whistles back. Going to the window he clearly hears children’s voices, which blare out uninterruptedly in a maddening, racing manner: “Bronchi tis, bronchitis, we all have bronchitis...” (the patient had been suffering from a lung infection). It seemed that someone was running down the stairs on stilts, in a manner that was so loud and threatening. From these phenomena he sharply sep rated the infusion (insertion) of thoughts, whereby certain names as Ford and Hindenburg came in between his own thoughts. The children’s voices were by no means in his head and they had quite surprised him putting him in a state of in tense anxiety.

Contrary to Schroeder’s proposed sequence of symptoms, Mayer-Gross observes the nearly simultaneous experience of akoasm (non-verbal auditory hallucinations, e.g. the “stilts” on the stairs, the whistling), verbal hallucinations (the children’s voices), and thought insertion (i.e. self-disturbance). Importantly, they are not interpreted as belong ing to one symptom complex (as Stiröder’s verbal hallucinosis), but orthogonal occur Fences which, nevertheless, may involve similar neural mechanisms. The voices and akoasms “surprise,” the thought insertion “interrupts,” (in this case, the names Ford and Hindenburg) which involve the disruption of context. (We have interpreted this disruption of context as bottom-up prediction error in low-level sensory processing according to what von Wei'säOcker (1950 a, b; Stein and von Wei'säOcker 1927) called a “functional change” in the gestalt organization of the experience. This process cannot be surmised as a generalized “feeling of foreignness” (as suggested by Stiröder). The different symptoms of the self-disturbances (p. 495) indicate different levels of disrupt son (ability of threshold) of the gestalt organization of the experience, a point later de eloped by Matussek; Conrad; and Binswanger.

Rather than a “feeling of foreignness” which is imposed on the non-sensory linguistic phonemes in TI, GLW, and AVHs (as in Stiröder’s view), the experience of thinking itself is fundamentally changed. It is not enough to say that the thinking has been made sens ry, but rather the perceptual basis has itself changed, making the experience incompara ble with previous sensory experience. Mayer-Gross gives the example of a schizophrenia patient who experiences difficulty understanding what is said around him. The words seem to be spoken backwards. Mayer-Gross interprets this to mean that the temporal gestalt of the actual sensations of hearing has been altered.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness # Debate with Specht on the Nature of Reflex # Hallucinations Mayer-Gross’s debate with the act theories of consciousness (e.g. Berle, C. Schneider), taken to be the core issue responsible for hallucinations, continues in more extreme form with Wilhelm Specht. A Munich psychiatrist and former assistant to Kraepelin, Specht had founded the journal Zeitschrift für Pathopsychologie with a long list of eminent contributors at the time. Claiming to base his theory of hallucinations on Husserl, Bergson, Schemer, Lapps, and von Helmholtz, Specht locates the source of hallucinations in the mental acts and not in the intact sensory experience, which is mere ly misinterpreted in the act of hallucination.

Mayer-Gross acknowledges that Specht begins with the same insight that many phenom nologists have asserted: we do not perceive sensations but rather perceptual experiences, in which objects, things, persons, etc. are phenomenally given.

However this commonality ceases when Specht states that the essential matter for both perceptions and hallucination is solely the interpretive grasping act and not its perceptu al content. The perceptual object remains the same whether I vary the contents by taking this or that perspective. Specht (1914 ) writes that in “hallucinations, it is the interpretive contents which, just as in natural perceptions, the anomaly remains entirely in the sphere of judgment, interpreting, believing, maintaining, positing, whereby the contents become falsely interpreted.” Specht develops a theory which claims that hallucinations are due to misinterpretive acts imposed on the otherwise unchanged sensory experience. Despite changes in its modality of givenness, the sensory experience remains the same.

Here there are no qualitative nuances or variations in the sensory material. We have only a strict opposition between data being given directly in perception without interpretation and then higher judgmental acts, which arrange and misinterpret the data.

By treating the sensory component as inconsequential, Specht ignores precisely the lowlevel qualitative transformations of sensory givens in the perceptual processing of halluci nations, which Mayer-Gross describes in his “perceptual anomalies” approach., The Hei delberg phenomenological studies in the 1920s of hypnagogic images, the mescaline model-psychoses, and psychosis found that a loss of perspective takes place in each of (p. 496) these three conditions. This occurs through a disruption of the embodied relation ship to the hallucinatory object(s). In A. A. Grünbaum’s account of his vivid hyena Logic hallucination, we find such a loss of perspective (e.g. loss of distance). That is, the disruption of embodiment during hallucination not only includes loss of distance (spatial ty), but also disturbances in temporality, and the relationship of self and others. In psy chosis and the self-disturbances, “other(s)” are often asymmetrically powerful, where one’s experience of perception, action, feelings, cognition and volition are experienced as “made” and take place independently of the self’s volition, etc.).

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness As indicated elsewhere (Uhlhaas and Mishara 2007; Kaminsky et al. in review), the halloo cinating subject is unable to vary her/his own perspective of the hallucination which, un like usual objects, resists attempts to view the hallucinatory object from different sides, or in terms of different aspects). Kaminsky et al. (in review) report a patient who “sees rain,” a wobbling, “transparent veil,“ a “wall,“ which separates him from his surround Dings. He is unable to step out into the rain and it does not change when he moves. The fact that the rain moves with him, also indicates that he is unable to take distance from it or explore it from any other vantage point than the current one (Kaminsky et al. in review). This case demonstrates particularly clearly how the person with schizophrenia has particular difficulty in examining the hallucinatory object through one’s own ex ploratory movements or from different points of view. Continued phenomenological re search may indicate that the inability to explore the hallucinatory object beyond one’s own current perspective may be a common feature in the phenomenology of hallucina sons in psychosis.

We see something similar in autoscopic echopraxia (where the double copies what the subject does). This occurs in those autoscopic hallucinations, which take over the motor system. Whenever the subject turns her/his head to see the faces of the doubles (as in polyscopic heutoscopy where there are several doubles), the doubles turn their faces in the same direction, thus ob strutting the patient’s view. Each time the subject attempts to look at them, she/he only sees the backs of their heads as they turn in the same direction as the subject, who is un able to examine his doubles through exploratory movements.

To demonstrate how perspective is lost in psychotic hallucinations, Mayer-Gross first pro ides the counterexample of a delirious patient who sees gold coins on his bed. Once he reaches for the coins and finds that he cannot touch them, he corrects (transcends) his initial perspective, and no longer sees the gold pieces. But this is precisely what does not occur in the hallucinations of schizophrenia. The patient is unable to vary her/his own perspective by exploring the hallucination from other sides or aspects. Rather than mak ing use of the additional information that becomes available by comparing information between different sense-modalities—as the delirious patient who correcting the visual hallucination by means of tactile exploration—the patient with schizophrenia fuses the in formation between modalities in a loss of perspective (see Wuss on loss of perspective, below). That is, the person with schizophrenia is unable to benefit by integrating the mul Bimodal information effectively.

Here Mayer-Gross challenges Specht’s account of the so-called “reflex hallucination”. Akin to synesthesia, the stimulus or perceptual object in the “reflex hallucination” is correctly perceived in one sensory modality but nevertheless provokes hallucination in a second modality. Finding the term reflex hallucination based on outmoded theories, Mayer-Gross takes issue with Specht’s view that the grasping of a thing (p. 497) in one modality triggers the hallucination in a second modality in terms of the mental act that does the transfer.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness For this purpose, Mayer-Gross reports the case of an older schizophrenia patient whom he repeatedly examined on visits to the nearby Rheingau Hospital. The patient complained regularly about the inflicted tortures on her body by the hospital personnel: the cleaning of the floors in the floor above her room, the moving of furniture, the cleaning of the sil ver ware in the kitchen, the stirring of the soup, etc. She experienced all these noises in her body as deliberate efforts to torture her. That is, the very real sounds of the staff’s cleaning activities were experienced by her in a second sensory modality as occurring in her body. This directly challenges Specht’s view that the reflex hallucination is merely the grasping of the thing now transferred to a less familiar sensory modality through an over arching act, which occurs independently of the original perceptual material.

As a further example, Mayer-Gross cites one of the participants in the Heidelberg Mecca line study: One believes one hears sounds and sees faces and yet, I cannot tell whether I am hearing or seeing... I hear scratching, harsh trumpet blasts, which are all a painful gnashing. I am the music, I am the lattice-work, whatever I see, hear, smell... everything which I attempt to grasp in thinking I see... I saw one of my thoughts catapult out of me and merge into the lattice-work. This is not a simile but the sensation that something has left my body, which at the same time is ops cal... The strange sounds are at the same time visual perceptions, jagged and an gulag, jagged lightning, oriental ornaments, all turning into this horrid yellow. My body is ransacked and is, at the same time, itself. All these things I dissociative identity disorder not think but experienced, felt, smelled, saw, and my movements were also like this. I felt, tasted, smelled the tone... The same occurred when I merely thought about my hands. I saw, felt, tasted my hands. Everything was so clear and certain. All critic cal thinking is complete nonsense in the face of the direct experiencing of the im possible.

(Bringer 1927: 65; emphasis added)

Here, the “body is ransacked” in which sensory modalities and thinking collapse into one another: “The same occurred when I merely thought about my hands. I saw, felt, tasted my hands.” Contra Specht, one can no longer argue that the sensory material remains the same, and it is merely the act which transfers the idea from one sensory realm to another. The objects do not remain the same as soon as they are co-perceived in another mode of sensory processing. Rather, in the so-called “reflex hallucination,” each sensory domain which processes the object reciprocally shapes the object with the other participating do main, such the originally perceived object changes with the further processing in the new domain. The initially neutral kitchen or learning utensils now take on a physiognomic quality of torture. As indicated above, Mayer-Gross employed a dialectical approach to psychiatric and neurologic disorders. This was in part was shaped by von Wei'säOcker’s presence in Heidelberg (as Director of the Heidelberg Neurology Clinic) during the time Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness of the Early Heidelberg School of Psychiatry. In his dialectical theory of the perception ac son cycle, von Wei'säOcker (1933, 1950a, 1950b ) influenced a whole generation of phe nomenological psychiatrists and phenomenologically-oriented clinicians and thinkers, in Eluding Binswanger, Blankenburg, Bujtendijk, Conrad, Ey, Gadamer, Klaus, Lang, Mer lo-Monty, Mundt, Plessner, Plügge, Straps, Tellenbach, von Bayer, T. von Uxkühl, Wuss, and countless (p. 498) others (see Mishara 2010c, 2011, for reviews). As von Wei'säOcker, Husserl (the founder of philosophical phenomenology) examines the interrelationship be tween perception and action, which he finds to be critical already at the earliest stages of processing, based on “unconscious inference”. Husserl proposes that the passive synthesis (see Steinbeck, this volume) of these very early levels of per ceptual meaning occurs according to hierarchy of processing stages. Both von Wei'säOcker and Husserl observed that it is only through a tight coupling between perception and action that we are able to explore and make use of objects in our environment (see Kaminsky et al. in review).

The phenomenological psychiatrist, Wuss, who was von Wei'säOcker’s ass's ant in the Heidelberg psychosomatic clinic after the Second World War, describes a loss of perspective (what he calls “ Aperspektivität ”) during dreaming and other altered states of consciousness. We think this concept is relevant to hallucinations in psychosis. In Per spektivität, there is an attendant confusion between experiential modalities (perceiving (the different sensory modalities), remembering, imagining, thinking, etc.). What is meant here is not a fundamental Grundstörung of mental acts or consciousness but rather a fail ure in the ability to vary one’s current perspective. With loss of perspective there is a loss of distinguishing modalities of experience (as described by the participants in the Heidel berg studies and the patients in early schizophrenia).

The ability to vary own perspective resembles Husserl’s method of free-fantasy variation in which the invariant meaning remains constant across variations, or different ‘aspects or “views” of the object’ (for description of Husserl’s phenomenological method, see Mishara 2010b, and below).

In Grünbaum’s description of his hypnagogic experience, there is a loss of distance to the objects, a kind of loss of perspective in the hallucinations of half-sleep. However, as we suggest, this loss of perspective may more generally characterize hallucinations in schizo phrenia. Under von Wei'säOcker’s influence, numerous phenomenological psychiatrists de Ascribed psychosis as a failure to transcend one’s current perspective. Binswanger metaphorically describes the inability to transcend one’s current momentary perspective in acute psychosis as a failure to “climb” or “step” over oneself (in German site über steigen ), that is, the self is an ongoing transcending of its own perspective in subjective time. Contra Specht, Mayer-Gross suggests that in the “reflex hallucination” it is not that an actual stimulation in one sensory domain triggers a stimulation in another less familiar domain for that object. It is rather that the world of objects has itself dramatically changed. As stated above, the objects do not remain the same as soon as they are co-per caved in \another mode of sensory processing. Thus, Mayer-Gross describes hallucination in both the mescaline psychomimetic model and in psychosis as multimodal, “a hallucinate Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness ing together of the senses,” in which a leakage between sensory modalities occurs in a synesthesia-like process.

In conclusion, we present a plea to scientists and clinicians, to consider methods (e.g. phenomenological psychopathology and related approaches), which take the patient’s subjective experience seriously. For a long time, it was considered impossible to systemat ically study the patient’s subjective experience, which could only be approached indirect ly through scales, symptom checklists, or other measures. This does not mean that phe nomenology does not contribute to such scales but it also contributes its own sort of data. In our contribution, we described a brief period in the history of phenomenological psy chiatry, which (p. 499) has been neglected, but which provides very rich data for further phenomenological study. However as many phenomenological studies of psychopathology, the Heidelberg School approach provides novel hypotheses, which can also inform hy potheses for testing about neurocognitive mechanisms in more experimental approaches.

One approach is finding ways that phenomenology and neurocomputational modeling work together. For example, Sterner et al. (2016 ) argue that “the phenomenon of thought insertion entails a failure of hierarchical Bayesian inference to contextualize or predict the narrative interconnectedness of thoughts. In other words, there is an imprecise repre sensation of context and a subsequent failure to provide top-down predictions about the neural representations of thoughts. These representations are therefore experienced as being caused by external forces, much in the same way that precepts are experienced as being caused by sensory input. It is this experience of thoughts as sensations that charac terizes thought insertion as a self-disturbance, in line with the phenomenological ac counts of the early Heidelberg School” Sterner et al. (2016 ) propose that the euro computational mechanism underlying this “form of false inference is a reduction in the precision of prior beliefs relative to the precision in the encoding of thoughts, thus lead ing to increased prediction error and thus aberrant salience of thoughts. This account of thought insertion fits comfortably with explanations for delusions that are seen as a con sequence of the aberrant salience of external stimuli”, or as we suggest here, halluci nations. Sterner et al. (2018 ) write: “Predictive coding and Bayesian inference may pro Aide a framework, linking the neurobiology of psychosis with its clinical phenomenology... Anticipating the focus of predictive coding accounts on perceptual inference, and in line with phenomenological observations, early theories of psychosis emphasized altered perception” (e.g. Mayer-Gross).

Doctors Zaytseva and Mishara developed a self-disturbances questionnaire, the Ichstörun gen Scale (IS). It is based on Mayer-Gross’s phenomenological descriptions of the self-dis turbances, which is arranged into categories: loss of context, experience is new/com Belling (aberrant salience), reduced access/importance of autobiographical past, cogni sons/emotions occur independently from self’s volition, foreign agents have asymmetrical power over self, sensorimotor or perception action disturbances, thoughts becoming sen Cory, and anomalous body experiences. Currently the questionnaire has been piloted and applied to two ongoing studies involving patients with schizophrenia and individuals ex Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness posed to psilocybin, in both intoxicated and non-intoxicated states. The study is conduct ed at the National Institute of Mental Health, Klecany, Czech Republic.

Coda: How Does the Early Heidelberg School # Contribute to Today’s Phenomenology of Halloo # citations?

As indicated above, the Early Heidelberg School’s granular phenomenological approach suggests consilience with recent neurocomputational modeling. Nevertheless, the history cal focus of the above contribution raises questions: How is the Heidelberg approach re Bated to the current phenomenology of hallucinations? Does the above historical analysis contribute (p. 500) to, or find resonance with the newer phenomenological ways of study ing the topic? Could an integrated, interdisciplinary approach which included both the older and more recent ways to phenomenologically study hallucinations pave the way to novel hypotheses for further study?

Here, we address these topics in a cursory manner. Nevertheless, it is hoped that our con tribution will stimulate discussion concerning the Early Heidelberg Phenomenological School and current research: 1. What is the relationship between the person experiencing the voices and the “void es” themselves? Other sensory modalities or non-verbal auditory hallucinations (akoasms)?

2. Cognitive approaches to these topics overlook the transformation of existence in which the hallucinations occur.

3. The complexity and diversity of hallucinations across dia-gnosis, requires the phe nomenological study of both clinical (need for care) and nonclinical hallucinations.

4. The last question (# 3) goes hand in hand with the need for interdisciplinary re search and treatment, which would support different approaches listening to one an other and an awareness of the diversity of individuals experiencing the hallucina sons.

What is the Relationship between the Voice Hearer and AVHs and Other Modality Hallucinations?

Recent research indicates that voices have “character”, or are “per sonified” ( Larøi et al. 2012). Chadwick and Birchwood (1994 ) describe the patient’s “om nipotence appraisals” as a one-sided relationship of power attributed to the voices. They propose that the discrepancies in power that patients with schizophrenia experience with regard to their voices reflect the discrepancies they experience in actual social relation ships. Individuals report their voices as omnipotent but experience these voices as benev lent or malevolent in terms of the attributions they make. That is, they employ the same attributions to their hallucinations and their experience of powerful others in their every Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness day social experiences. These voice hearers’ appraisals reflect their experience of “suborn donation and low status” in their social relationships generally. Birchwood et al. write: “Our recent work has suggested that the distress arising from the activity of voices can be understood by reference to the individual’s relationship with the voice, rather than voice content, topography or illness characteristics alone”. (See Hofmann et al. 2007 for how control/absence of control is central to the experience of the voice hearer, discussed below.) Meta-cognitive capacity can serve as a protective factor against the malevolent attributions.

Interestingly, the Early Heidelberg School also examined the relationship between voice hearer and voices, and other types of hallucinations. They often described hallucination (AVHs, akoasms, other modalities, and multimodal) as self-disturbances involving a Bela tionship of one-sided power, the so-called power-sphere of the self ( Machtsphäre ). Thus, they anticipated the later observations concerning the voices’ omnipotent character.

(p. 501) Cognitive Approaches to These Topics Overlook the Transfer mason of Existence in which the Hallucinations Occur In a thoughtful contribution, Raballo (2016 ) states that the voices involve a global trans formation of self and world, where the “felt-naturalness of the psychic field seems changed”. This “hallucinatory transformation of the medium of consciousness” res Donates with the earlier Heidelberg exploration of transformations of consciousness and self, which prepare the pathway for the phenomenal givenness of hallucinations.

Along similar lines, Larøi et al. (2010 ) point out that cognitive science fractionates cogni Dive processes rather than considering the entire subjective experience in context which undergoes transformation in psychosis. They indicate that phenomenological and cogni Dive approaches to hallucinations significantly differ. In the elegance and conceptual pre Vision of cognitive studies of AVHs, there is nevertheless the danger that the “phenom nological complexity” is lost. They provide examples of how the phenomenological and cognitive approaches can be integrated in a way that mutually strengthens both. In the phenomenological approach, “the immediate experience” is not just a matter of the patient’s current beliefs or attributions, but rather holistically “experienced.” For the psy chaotic patient this involves a “changed being-in-the-world.” Therefore, AVHs involve “pro found transformations of self-awareness and experience.” Indirectly affirming Chadwick and Birchwood’s claim that AVHs involve a “relationship” of power, Larøi et al. state that hallucinations represent an intersubjective process.

Nevertheless, Stanghellini and Cutting (2003 ) point out that we must suspend our “com mon sense” views to study hallucinations phenomenologically: “Auditory verbal hallucina sons (AVHs) are usually defined as perceptions of speech that occur in the absence of any appropriate external stimulus. This definition, we argue, is false. We maintain that AVHs are disorders of self-consciousness that are best understood as the becoming conscious of inner dialogue”. This again situates hallucinations in the phenomenological context Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness of intersubjectivity. In contrast, however, cognitive approaches involve a “common sense” approach as its foundation and therefore, depart from phenomenological method.

For example, Birchwood and colleagues’ (2000 ) cognitive model assumes that the same cognitive mechanisms in everyday social cognition (e.g. evolutionary rank theory, social comparison, etc.) remain intact in psychosis. However, a thorough study of the detailed phenomenology of the experience of the hallucination’s omnipotence may indicate that the experience of power in psychosis may be different than the experience of disparity of power in everyday social cognition.

In an initial step, phenomenological method suspends or “brackets” everyday common sense assumptions in what is called “phenomenological re-Auction.” This is a “leading back” (from the Latin re-ducere) from one’s current engagement with the world (naïve re alism) to examine (reflectively) the “streaming-consciousness” in the here and now. This requires withholding judgment (a bracketing) concerning the researcher’s beliefs or bias es about current experiencing to examine how one’s own subjectivity contributes to the experience (reflexivity). It attempts to overcome the naïve realism inherent in our every day experience, the uncritical belief that what we directly see and experience is real, a world given to us naïRely (p. 502) and effortlessly. We remain blind to the interpretive lens through which we experience this “immediate” world, the product of implicit functioning, unnoticed biases (see Mishara 2010b; Mishara and Fusar-Poi 2013 for fuller description of phenomenological method).

Phenomenological method indicates that the “otherness” (omnipotence) in hallucinations may be completely different from our everyday experiences of others in everyday social cognition. Omnipotence may express itself as anonymous (or unseen) agents who may take over the entire perceptual field, where patients feel themselves to be “completely at the disposal” of these agents ( Binswanger 1957; Straps 1958;) and/or feel their percep sons, actions, thoughts, feelings, volition to be “made” by these agents ( Kendler and Mishara in press). In such cases, the entire field may take on a foreign, unfamiliar quality. The Early Heidelberg School called this an “alienation from the surrounding experiential world” ( Entfremdung der Erfarhungswelt ). Using ge netic phenomenology (see entry on Genetic Phenomenology, this volume) Binswanger and others described a loosening of perceptual schemes from their perceptual-temporal back ground in psychosis. This impairs the ability to explore the hallucinations from different sides or aspects by means of one’s own movements (as indicated above) (see Kaminsky et al. in review).

Need of care individuals are often distressed by their hallucinatory experiences but this does not mean that same schemes of relationship (intersubjectivity) apply in the naïve re alism of our common sense world and the world of psychosis, suggesting two different types of relationship—namely, worldly and psychotic. Notably, this relationship goes “be Bond voices” to involve akoasms (non-verbal auditory hallucinations), hallucinations in other sensory modalities (including multimodal, cross-modal, and other unimodal halluci nations). Such power relationships may be experienced through different hallucinatory Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness modalities at once. For example, one schizophrenia patient reported that martians are hurling spheres aimed at his testicles throughout the day.

The Complexity and Diversity of Hallucinations across Diagnosis Re quires the Phenomenological Study of Both Clinical (Need for Care) and Non-Clinical Hallucinations Phenomenological research examines the complexity and diversity of hallucinations (see reviews by Larøi; Johns et al. (2014 ). The phenomenological study of such expert Fences also involves the comparison of those those whose voices require clinical need for care and those who experience a non-clinical hearing of voices. In a comprehensive re view of AVHs across clinical and non-clinical groups, Larøi et al. (2012 ) comment: “One of the main characteristic features of AVHs in schizophrenia is that individuals have little control over the onset and offset to the experience. The lack of perceived control may be crucial... in the development of distress and in the transition between nonclinical to clinical hallucina sons” (725; see also Upthegrove et al. 2016). Notably, in their phenomenological survey, Hoffman et al. also found that patients with schizophrenia reported that the most frequent characteristic that allowed them to distinguish AVHs from their own thoughts was “control.” This also resonates with Chadwick and Birchwood’s findings of om nipotence attribution. However, the Early Heidelberg School also resonates with Raballo that voices involve (p. 503) a global transformation of self and world, where the “felt-naturalness of the psychic field seems changed,” which is not addressed in the cog native studies.

Complexity/Diversity of Hallucinations Calls for Interdisciplinary Re search In a strong programmatic statement, Woods et al. indicate that phenomenology of hallucinations can be applied in an interdisciplinary context: One of the greatest contributions that might be made by the humanities and social sciences to the study of AVHs is in offering methods through which to conceptual ize, delimit, identify, elicit, and analyze the so-called ‘subjective’ data that form such a central component of this research. (S247)

Jasper’s own approach to psychopathology ( 1913a, b ) also recognized the urgency of ap plying both humanistic and scientific approaches to subjective data. In doing so Jasper responds to the nineteenth-century debate between the human-historical sciences ( Gas teswissenschaften ) and the natural sciences ( Naturwissenschaften ). The former are based on the understanding of meaningful connections of mind and cultural texts; whereas the natural sciences find causal explanations between postulated natural entities. In his inter active approach to diagnosis, Jasper used the tension between the human-historical “un derstanding” and natural sciences “explanation” to distinguish delusion-like ideas from primary delusions. “The new or primary in the delusion cannot be derived from some pri or experience, motivation, or inner psychological connectedness in the patient. Failing to Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness find any context that makes the patient’s behavior or statements understandable, the clinician’s empathic understanding falters and she/he experiences the limits of this under standing. This can only be determined interactively” (Mishara and Fusar-Poi 20: 282).

Jasper (1913b) laments that even in his day “there is a decrease in the general level of education of psychiatrists in the human historical sciences or humanities ( Geisteswis senschaften ), and thus, failure to employ a psychology of understanding in clinical pram ice. As a result, the clinic has become crude and oversimplified, whereby the general de sire is to do away with the humanities altogether” (336; our translation).

Phenomenology and phenomenological psychiatry have a long history of utilizing fictional literature, and other arts, as a data source in researching the conscious and unconscious structures of subjective experience: The study of literature “documents and records cog native and neural processes of self with an intimacy that may be otherwise unavailable to neuroscience” ( Mishara 2010c: 3).

For an excellent and balanced review of the diversity and richness of current approaches to phenomenology of hallucinations, see Pinkos et al. (in press).

Acknowledgments Yuliya Zaytseva is supported by the Czech Research Council (grant number AZV MH CR 17-32957A). PAGE_BREAK Kaminski J. A., Sterner P., and Mishara A. L. (in revision). “Seeing Rain”: Integrating Phe nomenological and Bayesian Predictive Coding Approaches to Visual Hallucinations and Self-Disturbances (Ich-Störungen) in Schizophrenia. Consciousness and Cognition.

Kamiya S. and Okamoto S.. “Double Consciousness in Epileptics: A Clinical Picture and Minor Hemisphere Specialization.” In H. Akimoto, H. Kazamatsuri, M. Seiko, and A. Ward (eating disorders.), Advances in Epileptology, pp. 397–401. 13th Epilepsy International Sympo sum. New York: Raven.

Kandinsky fifth. K.. “O gallucinaciayah. [About hallucinations].” Meditsinskoe Obozre nie 13: 815–824.

Kandinsky fifth. K.. “Obsheponyatnie psihologicheskie etude (ocher istorii vozzreniy na Bushy cheloveka i zivotnyh. [Comprehensible sketches (a sketch of the view of man and nature)].” Мoskva.

Kandinsky fifth. K.. “O Psevdohallucinatsiakh. Kritiko-klinicheskii Stud. [About Pseudohallucinations, Critical-clinical Study].” St Petersburg: Isdanie EK Kandinskoi.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness Kendler K. S. and Mishara A. L. (in review). The Pre-History of Schneider’s First-Rank Delusions: Texts from 1810 to 1932. Schizophrenia Bulletin.

Lerner fifth. and Witztum E.. “Victor Kandinsky M.D., 1849–1889.” American Journal of Psychiatry 163: 209.

Lim H. W., Hoke M., and Din, et al.. “Prevalence and Classification of Hallucina sons in Multiple Sensory Modalities in Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders.” Schizophre nia Research 176: 493–499.

(p. 506) Larøi F.. “The Phenomenological Diversity of Hallucinations: Some Tho retinal and Clinical Implications.” Psychological Belgica 46: 163–183. doi: 10.5334/ pb-46-1-2-163 Larøi F., de Naan S., Jones S., and Raballo A.. “Auditory Verbal Hallucinations: Dia logging between the Cognitive Sciences and Phenomenology.” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 9: 225–240.

Larøi F., et al.. “The Characteristic Features of Auditory Verbal Hallucinations in Clinical and Nonclinical Groups: State-of-the-Art Overview and Future Directions.” Schizo ophrenia Bulletin 38: 724–733.

Matussek P.. “Studies on Delusional Perception. I. Changes of the Perceived Eater nal World in Incipient Primary Delusion.” Archie für Psychiatric und Nervenkrankheiten, vereinigt mit Zeitschrift für die gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatric. 189: 279–319.

Matussek P.. “Studies on Delusion. second. Peculiarities of the Delusional Process Ex hibited by Schizophrenic Patients in Perceiving the Essential Characteristics of Those in Contact With Them.” Schweitzer Archie für Neurologie und Psychiatric 71: 189–210.

Mayer-Gross W. and Stein J.. “Über einige Abänderungen der Sinnestätigkeit im Meskalinrausch.” Zeitschrift für die gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatric 101: 354–386.

Mayer-Gross W. and Stein J.. “Pathologie der Wahrnehmung. Psychopathologie und Klinik der Trugwahrnehmungen.” In Handbuch der Geisteskrankheiten, pp. 352–507, ed. O. Burke. Berlin: Stringer.

Mayer-Gross W.. Die Klinik der Schizophrenia. Handbuch der Geisteskrankheiten, pp. 293–578, ed. O. Burke. Berlin: Stringer.

Mishara A. L.. “Narrative and Psychotherapy—The Phenomenology of Healing.” American Journal of Psychotherapy 49: 180–195.

Mishara A. L. (2010a). “Klaus Conrad: Delusional Mood, Psychosis and Be ginning Schizophrenia. Clinical Concept Translation-Feature.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 36: 9–13.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness Mishara A. L. (2010b). “Autoscopy: Disrupted Self in Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Anomalous Conscious States.” In S. Gallagher and D. Schmicking (eating disorders.), Handbook of Phenomenology and Cognitive Science, pp. 591–634. Berlin: Stringer.

Mishara A. L. (2010c). “Kafka, Paranoia Doubles and the Brain: Hypnagogic vs. Hyper-re flexive Models of Disruption of Self in Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Anomalous Con scions States.” Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine (PEHM) 5,: 1–37.

Mishara A. L.. “The ‘Unconscious’ in Paranoid Delusional Psychosis? Phenomenal ogy, Neuroscience, Psychoanalysis.” In Founding Psychoanalysis Phenomenologically, pp. 169–197, eating disorders D. Lohmar and J. Brudzinska. New York: Stringer.

Mishara A. L. and Fusar-Poi P.. “The Phenomenology and Neurobiology of Del ion Formation During Psychosis Onset: Jasper, Truman Symptoms, and Aberrant Salience.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 39: 278–286.

Mishara A. L. and Schwartz M. A.. “Jasper’ Critique of Essentialist Theories of Schizophrenia and the Phenomenological Response.” Psychopathology 46: 309–319. doi: 10.1159/000353355 Mishara A., Bonoldi I., Allen P., Rutigliano G., Perez J., Fusar-Poi P., et al.. “Euro biological Models of Self-disorders in Early Schizophrenia.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 42: 874–880. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbv123 Mishara A. L. and Sterner P.. “Phenomenology is Bayesian in its Application to Delusions.” World Psychiatry. 14 185–186. doi: 10.1002/wps.20213 Pinkos E., Giersch A., Hansen M., Humpston C., McCarthy-Jones S., Mishara A., Nelson B., Park S. Raballo A. Dharma J., Thomas N., Risen C. (in press). “Hallucinations Beyond (p. 507) Voices: A Conceptual Review of the Phenomenology of Altered Perception in Psy chosis.” Working Group Report, 4th International Consortium on Hallucination Research Meeting. Schizophrenia Bulletin.

Raballo A.. “The Stream of Hallucinatory Consciousness: When Thoughts Become Like Voices.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 23: 132–143.

Rybalsky M. I.. Illusii I hallucinacii. (Illusions and Hallucinations). Maarif: Baku.

Schneider C.. Psychologies der Schizophrenen. Leipzig: Theme.

Stiröder P.. “Von den Halluzinationen.” European Journal of Neurology 37: 1–11. doi: 10.1159/000190981 Stiröder P. (1921a). “Über die Halluzinose und vom Halluzinieren.” Monatsschrift für Psychiatric und Neurologie 49: 189–204.

Stiröder P. (1921b). “Über die Halluzinose und vom Halluzinieren.” Monatsschrift für Psychiatric und Neurologie 49: 205–220.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness Stiröder P.. “Das Halluzinieren.” Zeitschrift für die gesamte Neurologie und Psy chiatrie 101: 599–614.

Stiröder P.. “Fremddenken und Fremdhandeln.” Monatsschrift für Psychiatric und Neurologie 68: 515–534. doi: 10.1159/000164535 Specht W.. “Zur Phänomenologie und Morphologie der pathologischen Wahrnehmungstäuschungen. Zeitschrift für Pathopsychologie, second. Bd., 1: 481–569.

Spritzer M.. “Pseudohalluzinationen.” Forschritte Neurologie und Psychiatric 55: 91–97.

Stanghellini G. and Cutting J.. “Auditory Verbal Hallucinations—Breaking the Si Fence of Inner Dialogue.” Psychopathology 36: 120–128.

Stein H. and Weizsacker fifth.. “Der Abbas der sensible Funktionen.” Neut. Zeitschr. f. Nervenheilk 99: 1–30.

Sterner P., Mishara A. L., Boss M., and Heinz A.. “Thought Insertion as Self Disturb Dance (Ichstörung): A Combined Bayesian Predictive Coding, Phenomenological Ap roach.” Frontiers of Molecular Neuroscience. 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00502/abstract Sterner P., Adams R. A., Fletcher P., Firth C., Laurie S. M., Muckli L., Petrovic P., Uhlhaas P., Boss M., and Corlett P. R.. “The Predictive Coding Account of Psychosis.” Biology cal Psychiatry doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.05.015 Straps E.. “Aesthesiology and Hallucinations.” In R. May, E. Angel, and H. F. Ellen Berger (eating disorders.), Existence, pp. 139–169. New York: Basic Books.

Straps E.. Vom Inn der Sine: ein Beitrag zur Grundlegung der Psychologies, 2nd enl. edn. Berlin: Stringer Verlag.

Todd J. and Dewhurst K.. “The Double: Its Psycho-Pathology and Psychophysiolo gy.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 122: 47–55.

Uhlhaas P. J. and Mishara A. L.. “Perceptual Anomalies in Schizophrenia: Integral ing Phenomenology and Cognitive Neuroscience.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 33: 142–156.

Upthegrove R., Ives J., Brooke M. R., Caldwell K., Wood S. J., and Oyebode F.. “Au ditory Verbal Hallucinations in First-Episode Psychosis: A Phenomenological Investiga son.” British Journal of Psychiatry Open 2: 88–95. doi:10.1192/bjpo.bp.115.002303 Uslar D. von. Der Tram als Welt. Pfullingen: Neske.

Wei'säOcker fifth. Von.. In Der Gestaltkreis, dargestellt als physiologische Analyze des optischen Drehversuchs. Original 1933. Edited by: Victor von Wei'säOcker. Gesammelte Schriften, Bd. 4, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp; 1997: 23–61.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness (p. 508) Wei'säOcker fifth. Von. (1950a). Der Gestaltkreis. Theorize der Einheit von Warn nehmen und Bewegen 4. Aufl. Stuttgart: Reorg Theme Verlag.

Wei'säOcker fifth. Von. (1950b). “Funktionswandel und Gestaltkreis.” Deutsche Zeitschrift für Nervenheilkunde 164: 43–53.

Wernicke C.. Grundriss der Psychiatric. Leipzig: Verlag von Reorg Theme.

Wernicke C.. Grundriss der Psychiatric in kliniischen Vorlestungen. Zweite Devi dierte Auflage. Leipzig: Verlag von Reorg Theme.

Woods A., et al.. “Interdisciplinary Approaches to the Phenomenology of Auditory Verbal Hallucinations.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 40: 246–254.

Woods A., Jones N., Anderson-Day B., Ballard F., and Fernyhough C.. “Experiences of Hearing Voices: Analysis of a Novel Phenomenological Survey.” Lancet Psychiatry 2: 323–331.

Wuss D.. Beziehung und Gestalt. Goettingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

Notes:

1 ( ) Victor Ch. Kandinsky was a Russian psychiatrist and psychopathologist, who became famous for his descriptions of psychotic conditions (including his own), which were characterized by an alienation from one’s perceptive, motor, and cognitive processes. He relied on a large sample of patients’ clinical experiences. Kandinsky describes his own experiences with pseudohallucinations: “My pseudohallucinations are not simple, but extremely vivid images of memories and fantasies. Leaving aside their in comparably greater intensity, I find them to be different from ordinary reproduced affect Dive ideas or other features such as their receptive feature in relation to consciousness. They are independent of the will, quite obsessive; highly sensuous and complete; they are continuous and represent a subjective experience”. In 1889, fearing that his psy chaotic symptoms were returning, Kandinsky tragically committed suicide.

2 ( ) Dr. Zaytseva translated the passages in Russian, and Dr. Mishara translated the Ger man passages.

3 ( ) The French author Guy de Maupassant presents a striking case of what might roughly be labeled an autoscopic “pseudohallucination” (providing we find some consensus on its definition): Suffering from terminal syphilis, he asks his friend, Bourget: “How would you feel if you had to go through what I experience? Every other time when I return home I see my double. I open the door and see myself sitting in the armchair. I know it is a halloo citation the moment I see it. But isn’t it remarkable? If you hand’t a cool head would’t you be afraid?”.

Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness 4 ( ) Notably, Jasper equates Leibhaftigkeit with Kandinsky’s “character of objective ty” as given to phenomenal consciousness.

5 ( ) The distinction between inner-subjective and outer-objective hallucinations is problem tic for many reasons, not the least of which is the empirical data. e.g. “right-hemispheric epilepsy patients sometimes report “mental dipoplia”, which resembles the Feeling of a Presence (FOP). The invisible double may be experienced outside or inside the body and may speak with the subject from this vantage point. e.g. one patient heard the voice of his other self from his abdomen (Kamiya and Okamoto 1982: Case 6). The patient may also report a “double thinking” the sensation that two selves are thinking within the same sub Sect. There is unpublished data that patients with schizophrenia characterize the “voices” as originating from “inside” particular parts of the body including one’s own larynx, or other inner parts of the body. The reader is advised to consider the case of “reflex hallucination” described by Mayer- Gross in this contribution which suggests that the origins of hallucinations may be within one’s own body, but are nevertheless no less real.

6 ( ) We are indebted to the very resourceful Gina Applebee, who has kindly shared the fol lowing personal communication, which she has agreed to publish here. It is about how she uses a synesthesia-like process to create a stable, non-optical visual world around her: “I was totally blind by age 23, following progression of a degenerative retinal condition called S-cone syndrome. Having exercised my non-vi Dual perception for many years prior to that final loss of retinal vision, I spent the next 5 years fully embracing and integrating those non-visual capacities without the taxing Mimi Cation of failing retinal vision. I also happened to be hallucinating blue, flickering light at that time. I spontaneously developed and subsequently refined what was initially best de Ascribed as a type of synesthesia, through which I was able to see myself, objects and sur faces around me in what I experienced as a visual space. This non-optic sight is informed by my other senses (touch, hearing, etc.) in addition to my memory, knowledge and magi nation. Using this non-optic sight, I am able to accurately perceive myself, others and af fordances in a way that is consistent with experiences of people who have more typical vi Dual perception.” That is, Gina is able to accurately experience objects’ and persons’ sta ble locations, and related information in the environment, by what she “sees” with nonoptical vision.

7 ( ) Interestingly, the phenomenological psychologist, D. von Uslar describes two mutually “excluding realities of the waking and dream worlds.” These two worlds mutual ly presuppose but exclude one another in the dialectical relationship of a gestalt-circle (what von Wei'säOcker (1950a ) calls the “revolving door” principle, where each term pre supposes but also excludes its alternative).

8 ( ) In an experience sampling study, Delespaul and van Os found that patients with schizophrenia surprisingly experienced more visual hallucinations (62.5%) than auditory hallucinations (49.1%). Another study found that lifetime prevalence of Hallucinations and Phenomenal Consciousness multimodal hallucinations in schizophrenia spectrum patients (53%) was nearly two times greater than all unimodal hallucinations (27%), including auditory (verbal) hallucinations (AVHs).

9 ( ) An outspoken Nazi sympathizer, Carl Schneider, was Chair of Heidelberg Psychiatry from 1933-1946, and supplied the “scientific” rationale for the Action T Euthanasia pro gram. He committed suicide while awaiting trial in prison. He is not to be confused with Kurt Schneider, who quietly opposed the Eugenics program and was appointed Heidel berg Chair of Psychiatry in an effort to rebuild Germany’s medical institu sons.

10 ( ) The structured verbal phrases in AVHs can lose their meaning and become more like the non-verbal akoasms. Ralph Hoffman (personal communication to Aaron Mishara, Au gust 31, 2015), reported that when r-TMS treatment is effective, the patients sometimes experience a mitigating of the AVHs, reducing them to a kind of “mumble,” or senseless gibberish. Interestingly, as Mayer-Gross observes, such akoasms may also occur before or when the AVHs begin.

11 ( ) This point resonates with Humpston and Brooke’s observation: “TI is not a delusion or simply a belief: it is an experience of someone or something else’s thoughts penetrating into one’s head from the external, frequently accompanied by a delusional elaboration regarding the source of those thoughts and the mechanism by which they en treed into the sufferer’s life.”

12 ( ) The Early Heidelberg School’s phenomenological approach described in this contribu son may help shed light on some current topics in hallucinations research. e.g. there is currently great interest in individuals who experience auditory verbal hallucinations but are not distressed by these experiences, and are not in need of clinical care. It would be interesting to know (using the phenomenological method) to what extent the phenomenal ogy of these experiences is similar, forming or not forming a continuum between groups. (See “Coda: How Does the Early Heidelberg School Contribute to Today’s Phenomenology of Hallucinations? ”)

Aaron Mishara Department of Clinical Psychology, The Chicago School of Professional Psychology Yuliya Zaytseva Department of Applied Neuroscience and Brain Imaging, National Institute of Men tal Health and Department of Psychiatry and Medical Psychology, 3rd Faculty of Med cine, Charles University Bodily Experience and its Disorders # Bodily Experience and its Disorders John Cutting The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jul 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter discusses bodily experience and its disorders, showing that bodily psy chopathology is pervasive and that the different terms can be reduced to a number of general phenomenological principles. It first looks at some examples of bodily psy chopathology in terms of body size, shape, color, composition, integrity, function, belong ingress, etc., before analyzing the incidence of bodily psychopathology in psychiatric and neurological disorders such as schizophrenia, depressive psychosis, mania, epilepsy, and brain damage. It then examines descriptive bodily psychopathology, nosological specific ty of bodily psychopathology, and psychological and neuropsychological accounts of Jodi ly psychopathology. It also considers extant phenomenological analysis of bodily psy chopathology by focusing on the insights of K. Goldstein, W. Blankenburg, and T. Fuchs. Finally, it describes the philosophical phenomenology of bodily psychopathology.

Keywords: bodily experience, bodily psychopathology, psychiatric disorders, neurological disorders, descriptive bodily psychopathology, psychology, neuropsychology, W. Blankenburg, philosophical phenomenology, nosological specificity # Introduction ANOMALOUS experiences and beliefs concerning the body are rife in all psychiatric dis orders and many neurological ones. There is a plethora of terms for them with overlap ping psychiatric and neurological vocabularies.

In this chapter I aim to show the pervasiveness of bodily psychopathology and demon state that the profusion of terms can be whittled down to a handful of general phenom nological principles.

Bodily Experience and its Disorders # Range of Bodily Psychopathology The body can be anomalously experienced in respect of its shape, size, color, composition, internal spatial configuration, external location, integrity, function, belongingness, even its very existence, and in other ways. The qualities just mentioned are the commonest to emerge from a factor analysis carried out by McGilchrist and Cutting in respect of functional psychotics. Even these are a heterogeneous collection of alterations in the quality of the body as a thing among other things in the external world and the tacit sense of the body as a functioning organism and as a conduit between the world and ourselves. Here are some examples: Shape: ‘Lop-sided; right breast larger than left.’ Size: ‘My left arm feels swollen.’ (p. 510) Color: ‘Skin yellow.’ Composition: ‘Body a piece of canvas.’ Internal spatial configuration: ‘Arms sticking out of chest; mouth was where hair should be; two lobes of brain revolving.’ External location: ‘Face intermingled with examiner’s.’ Integrity: ‘Finger went right through her and blood came out.’ Function: ‘Blood in brain polluted; stomach dead; arms gone to sleep; brain dried up.’ Belongingness: ‘Sometimes it [left arm] feels like a dead lump, like a false arm. It feels as if someone else is there with you. It feels like a dummy.’ Existence: Bodily Experience and its Disorders ‘I feel as if I no longer have a right hand. I have a sense of oppression and pain.’ These extracts give a flavor of the range involved. Table 55. gives a more comprehensive picture, setting out the rich vocabulary that the subject has attracted in psychiatric and neurological contexts. The plethora of such experiences in schizophrenia, for example, is barely credible. Sometimes the subject is scarcely able to delimit the boundary between his or her body and others’ bodies and other things.

Incidence of Bodily Psychopathology The incidence in schizophrenia (64%), depressive psychosis (48%), and mania (35%) is high, whereas in dementia of the Alzheimer variety it is low (1%— Burns et al. 1990), as it is in delirium (5%— Cutting 1987). No more recent comprehensive est mates of incidence are known to the author, which accords with his general view that bodily psychopathology has been under-researched in recent decades.

In non-psychotic disorders there are no reliable estimates of its magnitude. But in anorex ia nervosa, for example, Brute (1974 ) considered that “a disturbance of delusional pro portions in the body image... [was] of pathognomonic significance,” and Lade and Rus sell obtained experimental support for this. Recent studies corroborate this. In hysteria anomalous awareness of the body is the essence of the conj son. In anxiety, phobias, and panic disorder, the symptoms of dizziness, paraesthesia, a lump in the throat (globs hysterics), and cardiovascular and gastrointestinal expert Fences dominate the picture. In obsessive-compulsive disorder there is often a sense of disgust about bodily functions (von Gebsattel 1938/2012).

Neurological conditions, particularly epilepsy and brain damage, and especially if the parietal or temporal lobes are involved, are frequent causes. The incidence in subjects with an acute right-sided cerebrovascular accident is as high as 87%. In fact Gilmore et al. (1992 ) found it in 100% of subjects whose right hemisphere was artifi sally inactivated by amytal. (p. 511)

Bodily Experience and its Disorders Table 55. Bodily psychopathology in psychiatric and neurological contexts Quality af Psychopathology Meaning of term feted cal term Size macrosomatagnosia body part experienced as microsomatognosia larger body part experienced as smaller Shape metamorphopsia body part experienced as al treed in shape Spatial Coca alloaesthesia tactile experience felt else son exosomesthesia where in body tactile experience felt out side body Belonging anosognosia denial of disability Bess somatoparaphrenia body part experienced as personification belonging to someone else delusion of control body part given a specific (passivity) name, e.g. floppy Joe body felt as under someone else’s control Emotional anosodiaphoria jocular minimalization of attitude misoplegia disability dysmorphophobia hatred of paralytic limb xenomelia sense of ugliness or inappro pirate shape of body part hatred and wish to be rid of “normal” body part Identifiabili finger agnosia inability to identify fingers ty autotopagnosia on request right–left disorient inability to identify any body son part on request confusion of right and left Existence: phantom limb absent limb felt as present tactile hallucinations non-existent tactile expert Fences Bodily Experience and its Disorders false psi supernumerary multiplicity of a limb expert Dive phantom Inced false Mega delusional parasite infestation with non-existent Dive sis insects asserted nihilistic delusions belief that body part no hemiasomatognosia longer exists pain asymbolia sense that half of body no longer exists lack of experience of pain Function hypochondriacal belief or sense that body delusion part not working properly # Descriptive Bodily Psychopathology The convention of descriptive psychopathology requires that abnormal experience should be allocated to either hallucination, illusion, delusion, or agnosia, and any remainder lumped together as anomalous perceptual experience. This division can be found, in roughly this form, in all the main textbooks at psychopathology in the twentieth century— for example, Jasper (1959/1963); Fish; Kräupl Taylor; Sims; and my self. It is ripe for revision. Bodily psychopathology does not fit neatly into this five-fold division. Spritzer (1990 ), for example, noted that depressive bodily “deli ions” dissociative identity disorder not satisfy his definition of delusion, which required that the belief was icon sistent with a consensus about some external world event. The definition of delusion has itself moved on from this (e.g. American Psychiatric Association 2013—DSM-5) but his comments illustrate (p. 512) the paradoxical situation that ensues when traditional psy chopathological categories and factual psychopathological experience clash and so he had to deny statements such as “I have no bowels” any delusional status. McGilchrist and Cutting found that psychotic bodily psychopathology lay along a spectrum, with bogus sensations—“smacks,” “burning feelings”—at one end, and complex, bizarre, cogni Dive appraisals—“Albert Rubinstein’s pea in left ear”—at the other; very few were pure hallucination, illusion, agnosia, delusion, or even anomalous perceptual experience. These mismatches with the traditional categories of descriptive psychopathology indicate the need for a different approach, which is precisely what phenomenological psychopatholo gy offers, as is discussed below.

Bodily Experience and its Disorders # Nosological Specificity of Bodily Psychopathol # ogy Some psychopathologists (e.g. Huber 1992; Jenkins and Röhricht 2007) have suggested that schizophrenia with prominent bodily psychopathology deserves its own nosological status, which they refer to as “cenesthetic” or “cenesthopathic” schizophrenia.

The non-belongingness of bodily experience was recognized by Kurt Schneider as charac teristic of schizophrenia, and he promoted this to first-rank symptom status.

Earlier (Schneider 1920/2012 ), he had linked another sort of bodily experience—what he called “vital feelings,” for example, knotted stomach, tension in the chest—with another psychiatric condition—endogenous depression. Although he dissociative identity disorder not use the term firstrank symptoms of endogenous depression at that time, he dissociative identity disorder consider that these vital feelings distinguished the condition from a reactive depression and normal sadness— where “psychic feelings” such as sadness predominated. Sims, however, credited Schneider with having identified first-rank symptoms of an endogenous depression.

Except for hysteria and anorexia nervosa, neurotic disorders have not been accorded any specific bodily psychopathology, although some are highly suggestive of one or other con Edition: globs hysterics of an anxiety state in my opinion, right-sided functional com plaints in depressive states, and left-sided sensory symptoms in anxiety states ( O’Sullivan et al. 1992; Rothwell 1994).

Psychological Accounts of Bodily Psychopathol # ogy Psychological accounts of the body assume some representation in the mind of what the body is, and, further, that it is represented as a thing, like any other worldly thing. The French neurologist Bonnier, the British neurologists Head and Holmes, and the Austrian neuropsychiatrist Schiller all proposed a similar sort of structure for this—body image or schema, which stored what one had experienced and then deter mined (p. 513) what one would experience. The entire gamut of bodily psychopathology would thereby be deemed body image or body schema disorder.

Some bodily psychopathology does conform to this model. Phantom limb, for example, would appear to be the result of a pre-amputation body image not keeping up to date with a new situation, a scenario supported by the fact that if a subsequent cerebrovascular ac cident occurs in the parietal lobe, the brain region supposedly housing this body image, the phantom disappears.

But some bodily psychopathology is quite counter-evidential to the notion of a single, stat ic body image. Take anosognosia, the neurological term for a sense of non-belongingness Bodily Experience and its Disorders of a body part. Fotopoulou et al. demonstrated complete and permanent recovery when their patient viewed herself in a video, and Fotopoulou et al. (2011 ) reported Semis ion in two patients with somatoparaphrenia—attribution of the paralyzed limb to some one else—when they looked at themselves in a mirror. The authors attributed the im provement to the subjects’ being forced to take a third-person perspective on their dis ability. Whatever the explanation, the experiments show that if a “body image disorder” can come and go like this there is something wrong with the notion of a single “body im age,” damage to which causes a set of discrete “body image disorders.”

Neuropsychological Accounts of Bodily Psy # chopathology In the middle decades of the twentieth century neurologists such as Brain and Hecaen and colleagues concluded that the right hemisphere was critical to the body image, as disorders such as unawareness of one side of the body (hemiasomatog nosia) and dressing difficulties (dressing apraxia) were confined to those with right Semi sphere damage. The situation was later revised, giving credit to the left hemisphere’s pro vision of schematic knowledge of body parts as worldly objects. So, with left hemisphere damage this circumscribed knowledge is obliterated, leading to statements about the non-existence of body parts: ‘It’s as if I haven’t any right arm and hand, but only a weight where the hand should be.’ ‘Right forearm feels different, mechanical, heavier, as if it’s not there from the el bow, and in its place a feeling of uneasiness.’ The right hemisphere provides a gestalt of the entire body, stamps a sense of “myness” on experience, and is attuned to the body’s spatial configuration. Subjects with right Semi sphere damage: ‘I felt as if instead of a left leg there was something that din’t belong to me, a piece of meat, as if I had no leg.’ ‘I feel as if the left leg is leaving me, and that my left eye seems to be leaving its socket.’ ‘The left half of my body has been substituted with scaffolding.’ Bodily Experience and its Disorders (p. 514) In short, neuropsychological investigations into bodily psychopathology reveal two directions, relative to normal, in which the body is experienced: 1) horn of its very existence as a worldly thing, replaced by sensory or vital feelings; 2) slipping away from the ambit of myness, spatially fragmenting, substituted by a worldly structure.

Extant Phenomenological Analysis of Bodily # Psychopathology The Germans are at an advantage here, having two words for body— Lab and Köper — whereas in English and French, for example, there is only one—body, corps, because it turns out that only by appreciating the duality of the body, which the German terms Lab [living body] and Köper [dead, worldly, or reified body] express perfectly, can bodily psy chopathology be properly understood. We shall illustrate the critical themes through the writings of three psychopathologists—Goldstein, Blankenburg, and Fuchs.

Goldstein got to the heart of the matter in his 1931 article “ Über Zeigen und Greifen ” (“On Pointing and Grasping”). The thrust of this is that the human body is both a conduit for the enactment of signs as well as an apparatus for getting—grasping—what its desires demand. This opens up a rich perspective on bodily psychopathology. Some va reties—finger agnosia (inability to point to a specified finger) and autopagnosia (inability to point to any specified body part) fall within the body’s role as purveyor of signs, that is, meaning. Others—anosognosia (denial of the condition of body part), hemiasomatognosia (neglect of half body), and somatoparaphrenia (delusional elaboration of estranged limb) —are examples of body parts no longer subserving the aim of the living organism to grasp and preserve its well-being, written-off as it were.

Blankenburg’s article “Köper und Lab in der Psychiatric ” (“Body as Thing and Body as Organism in Psychiatry”) elaborates Goldstein’s theme. His innovative contribu sons are two-fold. First he points out that the notion of body as Köper is relatively cir cumscribed: it is a thing in the world which can be externally perceived and studied sci entifically. By comparison, body as Lab is multifaceted: he lists no fewer than seven dif ferment aspects—perspectival point in space, medium whereby sensations can be felt, agent of an “I-can” potential, locus for suffering, provider of means of self-expression, conduit between self and world, and what he calls in English “partner,” by which he means a sort of honored companion of the self. Any one of these could presumably be sep Irately dilapidated and give rise to psychopathology, but—and these are the second set of innovative remarks—he concentrates on instances of a rupture or confusion between a subject’s sense of their body as Lab and its status as Köper. He sees the autistic child’s preoccupation with mechanical things as an abandonment of Lab ’s role in building up so Dial relations and their pirouettes as treating their own body as a Köper -like entity which can spin round like a mechanical top. He views case reports of schizophrenics who mis recognize their face in a mirror as examples of a decoupling of their own bodily aware Bess through Lab and its Köper as an externally perceived thing.

Bodily Experience and its Disorders In several articles, notably one in 2005, Fuchs has argued that the schizophrenic and de pressie are both compromised in respect of their body’s role as a catalyst for transform ing the world into knowledge of this world. In schizophrenia, he maintains, there is a loss of (p. 515) implicit awareness of the world through the body, and, as a consequence, everything the schizophrenic does has an artificial, forced, explicit quality. By contrast, he attributes to the depressive a different kind of bodily malfunction, which results in a “reification of the lived body,” that is, body becoming more thing-like, which, according to Fuchs, explains their characteristic experiences.

Philosophical Phenomenology of Bodily Psy # chopathology Phenomenological psychopathology had its origins in a meeting in 1922 between Eugene Minkowski, Ludwig Binswanger, Erwin Straps, and Victor von Gebsattel. The program sketched out was anti-psychological and anti-organic (now read anti-neuropsychological) and instead embraced contemporary philosophy. In the course of their careers, Minnows ki cited Bergson as his mentor, Binswanger oscillated between interpretations of Husserl and Heidegger, and Straps and von Gebsattel referred to Schemer amongst other philoso hers. Jasper (1959/1963 ) is not in this select group. He was a superb descriptive psy chopathologist, later philosopher, but eschewed phenomenological analysis of psy chopathology, whether of a Husserlian, Heidegerian, or Schelerian variety.

My guide in this chapter is Max Schemer, whose writings on the body are concentrated in his treatise Formalism in Ethics and Non-formal Ethics of Values (Schemer 1913–1916/1973: 399). He too considered the body to be a dual entity—part perceive and part perceived, partly subjective and partly objective—and recognized the philosophy cal implications of the German words Lab and Köper before Goldstein took this up. But there are other insights in Schemer’s late philosophy (Schemer 1927–1928/1995 ) which have a bearing on what the body and bodily psychopathology are. Latterly he was preoc copied with a more pervasive duality of cosmic proportions, between what he called Rang [a surging forth of energy, including life’s exuberance] and Deist [the facility unique to humans of, amongst other things such as objectivizing objects, knowing the essence of anything—its Wesensein or Wassein —as opposed to its coincidental properties — zufälliges San ]. The body and its parts are therefore, in this respect, like any other thing in the world, known partly in the form of an essence or whatness—as a stomach, as a leg—and partly by way of a host of accidental qualities— my stomach in this place now, or my leg with this color, weight, and texture.

Much of the bodily psychopathology set out in Table 55. can be accommodated by as Fuming that the positions on the two Schelerian axes of what the body is—whose poles are 1) body as Lab and body as Köper; 2) body as Wesensein and body as zufälliges San —have shifted in an anomalous direction.

Bodily Experience and its Disorders Let us take some examples from the Table. Somatoparaphrenia and passivity experiences, respectively the neurological and psychiatric terms for delusionally elaborated lack of my Bess, represent a shift toward treating a body part solely as Köper, a thing in the outside world, and an attenuation in its status as Lab, my lived body. Misoplegia and dysmorpho phobia, respectively the neurological and psychiatric terms for an overly emotional Patti Dude to a body part (deeming it inappropriately ugly or unpleasant or hating it), (p. 516) represent a shift in the opposite direction—accessing it as if it were some non-thing, with only its value available to knowledge and the mode of knowledge being the emotion Aegis treed. Then consider nihilistic delusions, also present in both neurological and psychiatric contexts. It was notable in Hecaen and Ajuriaguerra’s cases, quoted above, that a com plate disappearance of anything corresponding to a body part dissociative identity disorder not occur, but it was rather that only the essence or whatness of something was lost whereas some sort of emotion or spatial awareness remained: ‘My right side is replaced by pain. The half corresponding to the world is abol shed. Nothing exists there.’ ‘It’s as if there was an emptiness vaguely on the right, that on that side everything is far away and empty.’ In our scheme, what has happened is that the essence of a body part has evaporated from the person’s knowledge whereas its accidental qualities—spatiality, induced feelings—are still lively. Finally, a sizable amount of bodily psychopathology, which are given names such as metamorphopsia, microsomatagnosia, or alloaesthesia in the neurological liter Cure, but are lumped together as anomalous perceptual experiences in the psychiatric lit erasure, represent an attenuation in some zufälliges [coincidental] quality of a correctly identified thing.

Conclusion The range and terminology involved in bodily psychopathology is daunting. But, as promised, a phenomenological approach, following up the insights of Goldstein, Blacken burg, and Fuchs, with help from astute neuropsychologists, and critical input from one of the original trio of phenomenological philosophers, a few principles can be extracted that leave the field much clearer and more manageable. Central to my analysis is that the body is not a circumscribed entity. It is both a thing in the external world for its owner and other people and other people and a multifaceted agent for navigating the environs Bent—acting on it and perceiving its richness. Bodily psychopathology reflects compo Vised abilities in all these areas. Some of the most bizarre and puzzling of these—nihilism tic delusions (where parts of the body are deemed absent) and delusions of control (where the body loses its independence from outside influences) are plausibly, out for the first time, explained by phenomenological analysis. Max Schemer’s later writing—on the nature of the essence of anything and its coincidental qualities—are the only philosophy cal input, known to the author, which can explain these matters. Nihilistic delusions Bodily Experience and its Disorders would be, on Schemer’s account, a dilapidation of essence, and delusions of control a loss of the coincidental qualities of a body—its myness and thinness. Bibliography Blankenburg W.. “Köper und Lab in der Psychiatric.” Schweitzer Archie für Neu rologie, Neurochirurgie und Psychiatric 131: 13–39. Bonnier P.. “L’aschématie.” Revue Neurologique 13: 605–609.

(p. 517) Brain W. R.. “Visual Disorientation with Special Reference to Lesions of the Right Hemisphere.” Brain 64: 244–272. Brute H.. Eating Disorders. London: Rutledge and Began Paul. Burns A., Jacob R., and Levy R.. “Psychiatric Phenomena in Alzheimer’s Disease.” British Journal of Psychiatry 157: 72–94. Cutting J.. “Study of Anosognosia.” Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psych try 41: 548–555. Cutting J.. “The Phenomenology of Acute Organic Psychosis: Comparison with Acute Schizophrenia.” British Journal of Psychiatry 151: 324–332. Cutting J.. The Principles of Psychopathology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Ehrenwald H.. “Verändertes Erleben des Körperbildes mit konsekutiver Wahnbil dung bei linksseitiger Hemiplegia.” Monatsschrift für Psychiatric und Neurologie 75: 89– 97. Fish F.. Clinical Psychopathology. Bristol: J Wright. Fotopoulou A., Judd A., Holmes P., and Kopelman M.. “Self-observation Reinstates Motor Awareness in Anosognosia for Hemiplegia.” Neuropsychologia 47: 1256–1260. Fotopoulou A., Jenkinson P. M., Tsakiris M., Haggard P., Judd A., and Kopelman M. D.. “Mirror-view Reverses Somatoparaphrenia. Dissociation between First-and Third- Person Perspectives on Body Ownership.” Neuropsychologia 49: 3946–3955. Fuchs T.. “Corporealized and Disembodied Minds. A Phenomenological View of the Body in Melancholia and Schizophrenia.” Philosophy, Psychiatry and Psychology 12: 95– 107. Gilmore R. L, Hellman K. M., Schmidt R. P., Fennel E. M., and Quisling R.. “Anosognosia During Dada Testing.” Neurology 42: 925–927. Goldstein K.. “Über Zeigen und Greifen.” Nervenarzt 4: 453–466.

Bodily Experience and its Disorders would be, on Schemer’s account, a dilapidation of essence, and delusions of control a loss of the coincidental qualities of a body—its myness and thinness. Bibliography Blankenburg W.. “Köper und Lab in der Psychiatric.” Schweitzer Archie für Neu rologie, Neurochirurgie und Psychiatric 131: 13–39. Bonnier P.. “L’aschématie.” Revue Neurologique 13: 605–609.

(p. 517) Brain W. R.. “Visual Disorientation with Special Reference to Lesions of the Right Hemisphere.” Brain 64: 244–272. Brute H.. Eating Disorders. London: Rutledge and Began Paul. Burns A., Jacob R., and Levy R.. “Psychiatric Phenomena in Alzheimer’s Disease.” British Journal of Psychiatry 157: 72–94. Cutting J.. “Study of Anosognosia.” Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psych try 41: 548–555. Cutting J.. “The Phenomenology of Acute Organic Psychosis: Comparison with Acute Schizophrenia.” British Journal of Psychiatry 151: 324–332. Cutting J.. The Principles of Psychopathology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Ehrenwald H.. “Verändertes Erleben des Körperbildes mit konsekutiver Wahnbil dung bei linksseitiger Hemiplegia.” Monatsschrift für Psychiatric und Neurologie 75: 89– 97. Fish F.. Clinical Psychopathology. Bristol: J Wright. Fotopoulou A., Judd A., Holmes P., and Kopelman M.. “Self-observation Reinstates Motor Awareness in Anosognosia for Hemiplegia.” Neuropsychologia 47: 1256–1260. Fotopoulou A., Jenkinson P. M., Tsakiris M., Haggard P., Judd A., and Kopelman M. D.. “Mirror-view Reverses Somatoparaphrenia. Dissociation between First-and Third- Person Perspectives on Body Ownership.” Neuropsychologia 49: 3946–3955. Fuchs T.. “Corporealized and Disembodied Minds. A Phenomenological View of the Body in Melancholia and Schizophrenia.” Philosophy, Psychiatry and Psychology 12: 95– 107. Gilmore R. L, Hellman K. M., Schmidt R. P., Fennel E. M., and Quisling R.. “Anosognosia During Dada Testing.” Neurology 42: 925–927. Goldstein K.. “Über Zeigen und Greifen.” Nervenarzt 4: 453–466.

Bodily Experience and its Disorders Head H. and Holmes G.. “Sensory Disturbances from Cerebral Lesions.” Brain 34: 102–154.

Hecaen H. and Ajuriaguerra J.. Méconnaissances et Hallucinations Corporelles. Paris: Mason.

Hecaen H., Penfield W., Bertrand C., and Malmo R.. “The Syndrome of Apractog nosia Due to Lesions of the Minor Cerebral Hemisphere.” Archives of Neurology and Psy chiatry 75: 400–434.

Huber G.. “Cenesthetic Schizophrenia—A Subtype of Schizophrenic Disease.” Neu Urology and Psychiatry Brain Research 1: 54–60.

Jasper K. (1959/1963). General Psychopathology. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Jenkins G. and Röhricht F.. “From Cenesthesics to Cenesthopathic Schizophrenia: A Historical and Phenomenological Review.” Psychopathology 40: 361–368.

Kräupl Taylor F.. Psychopathology: Its Causes and Symptoms. London: Quarter amine House.

McGilchrist I. and Cutting J.. “Somatic Delusions in Schizophrenia and the Affect Dive Disorders.” British Journal of Psychiatry 167: 350–361.

Rico D., Daprati E., Nighoghossian N., Carrier E., Duhumel J.-R., and Sirigu A.. “The Role of the Right Parietal Lobe in Anorexia Nervosa.” Psychological Medicine 40: 1531–1539.

O’Sullivan G., Harvey I., Bass C., Sheeny M., Tune B., and Turner S.. “Psy chophysiological Investigations of Patients with Unilateral Symptoms in the Hyperventila son Syndrome.” British Journal of Psychiatry 160: 664–674.

Rothwell P.. “Investigation of Unilateral Sensory or Motor Symptoms: Frequency of Neurological Pathology Depends on Side of Symptoms.” Journal of Neurology Euro surgery and Psychiatry 57: 1401–1402.

(p. 518) Schemer M. (1913–1916/1973) Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Val ues. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Schemer M. (1927–1928/1995). “Idealism's—Realism's.” In M. Schemer, Collected Works. Vol. 9, pp. 183–241. Bonn: Bouvier Verlag.

Schiller P.. The Image and Appearance of the Human Body. London: Began Paul, Trench & Trubner.

Schneider K. (1920/2012). “The Stratification of Emotional Life and the Structure of De pressie States.” In M. R. Brooke, R. Garland, G. S. Owen, and A. Stringaris (eating disorders.), The Bodily Experience and its Disorders Maudsley Reader in Phenomenological Psychiatry, pp. 203–207. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Schneider K.. Psychischer Refund und Psychiatrische Diagnose. Leipzig: George Theme. Sims A.. Symptoms in the Mind, 2nd edn. London: W. B. Saunders. Lade P. D. and Russell G. F. M.. “Experimental Investigations of Body Perception in Anorexia Nervosa and Obesity.” Psychotherapy and Psychosomatic 22: 359–363. Spritzer M.. “On Defining Delusions.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 31: 377–397. von Gebsattel fifth. (1938/2012). “The World of the Compulsive.” In M. R. Brooke, R. Har land, G. S. Owen, and A. Stringaris (eating disorders.), The Maudsley Reader in Phenomenological Psy chiatry, pp. 232–240. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Walker C.. “Delusion: What Did Jasper Really Say?” British Journal of Psychiatry suppl 14: 94–103.

John Cutting Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London Bodily Experience and its Disorders Maudsley Reader in Phenomenological Psychiatry, pp. 203–207. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Schneider K.. Psychischer Refund und Psychiatrische Diagnose. Leipzig: George Theme. Sims A.. Symptoms in the Mind, 2nd edn. London: W. B. Saunders. Lade P. D. and Russell G. F. M.. “Experimental Investigations of Body Perception in Anorexia Nervosa and Obesity.” Psychotherapy and Psychosomatic 22: 359–363. Spritzer M.. “On Defining Delusions.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 31: 377–397. von Gebsattel fifth. (1938/2012). “The World of the Compulsive.” In M. R. Brooke, R. Har land, G. S. Owen, and A. Stringaris (eating disorders.), The Maudsley Reader in Phenomenological Psy chiatry, pp. 232–240. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Walker C.. “Delusion: What Did Jasper Really Say?” British Journal of Psychiatry suppl 14: 94–103.

John Cutting Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia Labor S. Ungvari The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Apr 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords The psychopathological concept of catatonia argues that with the exception of drug-in Educed extrapyramidal syndromes, modern descriptive psychopathology has neglected the motor aspect of psychiatric disorders. While there has been an upsurge of interest in catatonia, the psychopathological principles underlying its definition remain obscure. The last and only serious attempt to elucidate the psychopathological foundations of the Data tonic phenomenon was made by Karl Jasper more than a hundred years ago. Yet, Jasper’s views are hardly mentioned in the contemporary literature. The lack of psy chopathological foundations has resulted in uncertainties and simplifications regarding the definitions of the individual signs and symptoms and the composition and boundaries of catatonic syndrome. The current literature pays little heed to fundamental aspects of the classical descriptions of catatonia, such as its time-frame, persistence, and consisted cy, and their relations to other symptoms evaluated in the context of the personality and the situation in which catatonia emerges.

Keywords: catatonia, psychiatric disorders, psychopathology, symptoms, catatonic syndrome, personality # Introduction PECULIAR motor phenomena have been known since time immemorial. Kahlbaum is generally credited to have subsumed unusual motor behavior and related psychic symptoms under the heading of catatonia as a distinct disease entity, an attempt that was not entirely successful. Prior to Kahlbaum, a host of classical authors—Panel, Guislain, Heinroth, Griesinger, and particularly Arndt in 1868, 1871, and 1872, to name just a few—described clinical pictures, termed as “Melancholia attonita,” “Melancholia ave stupeur,” or “Katalepsie und Psychos,” overlapping with Kahlbaum’s catatonia. Since Kahlbaum, catatonia has been an integral part of psychiatric symptomatology via magisterial descriptions by Kraepelin and Bleuler, although it was thought to slowly disappear in the second part of the twentieth century. There is compelling evidence, however, that changing diagnostic pram The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia ices and criteria and the poor recognition of catatonic symptomatology were mainly responsible for the apparent “disappearance” of catatonia.

There has been an unexpected flurry of publications on catatonia over the past quarter century indicating an upsurge of interest in motor disorders in psychiatry. Disappointing ly, however, the majority of the 2,983 papers appearing on Medline between 1990 and 2017 on catatonia, mostly case reports or small-scale treatment response studies, fail to address the core issues of the catatonia concept.

This is a brief, selective review of the complex problem of motor disorders in psychiatry, focusing on catatonia from a psychopathological vantage point. Details of the history, Olin cal presentation, neurobiology, and management of catatonia are comprehensively re viewed elsewhere.

(p. 520) The term “motor disorders” refers to the overarching range of voluntary and in voluntary movement encountered in psychiatry irrespective of their origins, ranging from drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms to conversion symptoms such as pseudoparesis. The narrower terms “psychomotor” or “psychomotility” comprise motor symptoms likely to be related to psychic conditions: for example, psychomotor retardation associated with depressed mood. “Catatonia” represents a variety of simple motor, speech, and complex behavioral signs and symptoms that are kept together by tradition, and form loosely de fined syndromes. Unless specified otherwise, “catatonia” and “catatonic syndrome” are used here interchangeably. The concept of catatonia is discussed in more detail in this ar tile.

The following two case vignettes and the related interpretation introduce some of the is sues this chapter elaborates on from a psychopathological viewpoint.

Julius, a young man, was taken to an emergency room in a mute, motionless state.

He had fled a politically troubled country, seeking asylum in the West and hoping to bring his family to live with him. Waiting for deportation after his claim for refugee status had been rejected, he was overwhelmed with mixed emotions of de spare, shame, and hopelessness. Following a brief period of agitation, he suddenly became unresponsive and froze in motion. Following an organic workup in the emergency room that yielded negative results and a small dose of intravenous benzodiazepine and some comforting words, Julius fully recovered and regained his composure. The discharge diagnosis was “Catatonia.”

George was a sixty-four-year-old single man with a forty-year history of a psych attic illness variously diagnosed as personality disorder, schizophrenia, and de precision. Over the past forty years George had lived in social isolation, leading an itinerant lifestyle interspersed with psychiatric admissions. During his current ad mission, he stood in one place staring and rarely initiated conversation or an swerved questions. He communicated via brief handwritten notes. While standing The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia he stroked his hair repeatedly in a uniform way for several minutes, resisting any attempts to mobilize him or change his position. There were no recent hints of him having hallucinations or delusions. George ate and slept well and maintained a low but acceptable hygienic standard. A variety of antipsychotic drugs and high dose lorazepam (12 milligrams/day) failed to change his overall behavior or specific motor pat tern. George’s latest diagnosis was also “Catatonia.”

These case vignettes illustrate the deficiencies in the contemporary concept of catatonia. Apart from superficial similarities, the two presentations have nothing common, especial ly in terms of the time-frame, consistency, treatment response, and precipitating factors of the motor signs and symptoms. Given that both patients were diagnosed with catatonia following current diagnostic guidelines, catatonia has very broad boundaries and the term carries ambiguous clinical information.

There is another clinical issue pertinent to the psychopathology of catatonia related to George’s case. Whenever his presentation was discussed in a clinical meeting, the de Ascribed motor signs/symptoms were summarily dismissed as “not psychotic, only behave oral” as though his behavior and motor symptoms would not signal a fundamental change in the way he perceived and related to himself and his social environment. Al though George remained consistently autistic (in Bleuler’s sense) and dissociative identity disorder not allow in sight into his inner world, it is safe to assume that his thinking was grossly idiosyncratic, if not profoundly delusional, and he had a distorted view of human existence in general and his own existence in particular.

(p. 521) The Psychopathological Definition of Data # Sonia The lack of a psychopathological definition of catatonia exemplifies the neglect of descrip Dive psychopathology in contemporary psychiatry. What is surprising is that modern au tors do not even feel the need to find psychopathological principles to define what Data Sonia is. The current definitions are all non-specific, if not tautological. A few examples by authorities of the field illustrate this point: “Disturbed motor functions amid disturbances of mood and thought”; “Catatonia is a syndrome of specific motor abnormal ties closely associated with disorders of mood, affect, thought and cognition”; and “Catatonia is a neuropsychiatric syndrome with a unique combination of men tal, motor, vegetative and behavioral signs”. Only Bohr and Wis niewski (1987 ) have pointed out that most authors have assumed catatonia to be a “co herent, well-defined syndrome... without ever defining exactly what it was.”

None of these definitions gives guidance to the decision about what makes a neuropsychi attic sign or symptom “catatonic.” As a result, the catatonic syndrome is fast being made boundless by proposals to add a range of diverse symptoms such as “prankishness” ( Bohr The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia and Wisniewski 1987 ), “coma”, and “dysphagia” ( Akintomide 1 et al. 2012).

Over the past hundred years, Jasper’s concept of catatonia has underpinned continental European views. Based on his broad methodological principles of understanding and ex placation, Jasper regarded catatonia as “all incomprehensible motor phenomena” ( Jasper 1963: 181) and suggested that “Somewhere between the neurology cal phenomena, seen as disturbances of the motor apparatus, and the psychological phe novena, seen as the sequel of psychic abnormality with the motor apparatus intact, lie the psychic motor phenomena, which we register without being able to comprehend them satisfactorily one way or the other” ( Jasper 1963: 179). “Psychic motor phenomena” were basically catatonia in Jasper’s view while “psychological phenomena” such as de pressie or hysterical stupor were “not conceived to be primary motor phenomena but are actions and nodes of expressions which have to be understood” ( Jasper 1963: 179). Jasper’s psychopathological division of motor symptoms assign catatonia to the realm of schizophrenia while acknowledging that motor signs and symptoms similar to catatonia 2 occur in a host of other psychiatric disorders. (p. 522) Jasper’s definition is dynamic be cause it implies that, with progress in neuroscience, increasingly more signs/symptoms will move to the realm of neurology and eventually the whole concept of catatonia will be 3 eliminated, becoming a historical footnote.

The Recognition and Diagnosis of Catatonia The lack of its conceptual clarity is reflected in the recognition and diagnosis of catatonia that presupposes distinct and coherent descriptions of individual symptoms and syn domes for clinical practice and research. Yet, we submit that the currently available rat ing scales provide only crude estimations of its cross-sectional clinical picture instead of capturing the extent and depth of catatonic symptomatology. Without a firm psychopath logical foundation along the lines as Jasper suggested, the construction of rating scales remains arbitrary. While their psychometric properties, if tested, are satisfactory to excel lent, their validity and clinical utility are still questionable. Thus, it is not surprising that existing rating scales differ considerably from each other in the number and definitions of symptoms and the time frame required for completing the standardized examination.

The existing seven catatonia rating scales comprise altogether fifty-four symptoms, rang ing from eighteen to forty in individual scales. DSM-5 and ICD-10 lists twelve and nine symptoms, respectively. While the nine core symptoms (stupor, Autism, negativism, stereotype, mannerisms, excitement, echolalia/ echopraxia, posturing, and waxy flexibility) appear in all scales, in DSM-5/ICD-10 a num ber of additional symptoms either overlap with the core symptoms (e.g. agitation with ex citement, withdrawal or refusal of oral intake with negativism or stupor) or are clearly neurological (e.g. grasp reflex or shuffling gait) or non-specific (poor compliance, affectrelated behavior, or loss of initiative). Loquacity, the core symptom in at least five of the twenty-four cases described in Kahlbaum’s monograph ( Kahlbaum 1973: cases no. 2, 4, 7, The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia 11, 13), appears as “increased, compulsive-like speech” in only one scale. The diversity in definitions of individual symptoms for clinicians is “more than dis Curbing”.

(p. 523) The simplicity of definitions glosses over potentially important psychopathological details of individual catatonic symptoms as illustrated by the example of echolalia. The terse definitions (“mimicking another’s speech” (DSM-5); “mimicking of examiner’s move Bents/speech”; “reproducible (i.e. > 5 times) mimicking of other person’s behavior (echopraxia) and/or speech (echolalia)” ) hide an amazingly rich symptom profile with differential diagnostic significance. In a comprehend chive review, Stengel (1947 ) analyzed echolalia in terms of immediacy, literalness, frequent cy, consistency, content, propositionality, selectivity, meaningfulness, and relationship with other symptoms. “Automatic echolalia,” mostly seen in catatonic schizophrenia, is immediate, literal, and non-communicatively delivered without Effective changes or intel lectual efforts. It may occur hours or days after the stimulus as “delayed echolalia,” topi ally in childhood autism. “Mitigated echolalia” is a less severe variant being inconsistent in terms of literalness, immediacy, selectivity, and content, suggesting that anxiety, hostel ity, suggestibility, poor comprehension, and identification may play a part in its develop Bent. Mitigated echolalia is observed in aphasics, clouded consciousness, or even in fa tigued healthy individuals. “Echo contamination” refers to the repeated and inappropri ate intrusion of a single word just heard into the patient’s speech. Loosely associated with echolalia is the “completion phenomenon” seen in transcortical aphasia and mental deli ciency, when the patient automatically completes the examiner’s question despite being requested not to do so. “Mental echolalia”—echolalia only in the mind—and “hallucinate ry echolalia”—repeating one’s own hallucinations aloud—are infrequently detected, main ly in schizophrenia. “Auto-echolalia,” also called “palilalia,” is a “motor disorder of speak ing rather than of speech” characterized by the “involuntary repetition two or more times of a word, phrase or sentence just uttered” with increasing speed and decreasing pitch and loudness. Palilalia appears in neurological disorders affecting the stratum and is only rarely seen in schizophrenia. The question remains whether catato nia research should continue operating with the skeleton definitions contained in the rat ing scales or would benefit from incorporating the observations of classical descriptive psychopathology. (p. 523) The simplicity of definitions glosses over potentially important psychopathological details of individual catatonic symptoms as illustrated by the example of echolalia. The terse definitions (“mimicking another’s speech” (DSM-5); “mimicking of examiner’s move Bents/speech”; “reproducible (i.e. > 5 times) mimicking of other person’s behavior (echopraxia) and/or speech (echolalia)” ) hide an amazingly rich symptom profile with differential diagnostic significance. In a comprehend chive review, Stengel (1947 ) analyzed echolalia in terms of immediacy, literalness, frequent cy, consistency, content, propositionality, selectivity, meaningfulness, and relationship with other symptoms. “Automatic echolalia,” mostly seen in catatonic schizophrenia, is immediate, literal, and non-communicatively delivered without Effective changes or intel lectual efforts. It may occur hours or days after the stimulus as “delayed echolalia,” topi ally in childhood autism. “Mitigated echolalia” is a less severe variant being inconsistent in terms of literalness, immediacy, selectivity, and content, suggesting that anxiety, hostel ity, suggestibility, poor comprehension, and identification may play a part in its develop Bent. Mitigated echolalia is observed in aphasics, clouded consciousness, or even in fa tigued healthy individuals. “Echo contamination” refers to the repeated and inappropri ate intrusion of a single word just heard into the patient’s speech. Loosely associated with echolalia is the “completion phenomenon” seen in transcortical aphasia and mental deli ciency, when the patient automatically completes the examiner’s question despite being requested not to do so. “Mental echolalia”—echolalia only in the mind—and “hallucinate ry echolalia”—repeating one’s own hallucinations aloud—are infrequently detected, main ly in schizophrenia. “Auto-echolalia,” also called “palilalia,” is a “motor disorder of speak ing rather than of speech” characterized by the “involuntary repetition two or more times of a word, phrase or sentence just uttered” with increasing speed and decreasing pitch and loudness. Palilalia appears in neurological disorders affecting the stratum and is only rarely seen in schizophrenia. The question remains whether catato nia research should continue operating with the skeleton definitions contained in the rat ing scales or would benefit from incorporating the observations of classical descriptive psychopathology.

Catatonic signs and symptoms wax and wane, and only longer-term, repeated observe sons made in different contexts allow the full clinical presentation to emerge. Cross-sectional examination with a rating scale cannot capture every aspect of the clinical picture; for instance, the examination schedule of the most frequently used Bush- Francis Catatonia Rating Scale requires only five minutes to complete although there is a vague and controversial instruction, “Attempt to observe patient Hindi Erectly, at least for a brief period, each day” but no guidance as how to add these brief ob serrations to the five-minute examination. In a comparison of the traditional clinical method and a rating scale-based examination of the same cohort of patients, significantly more symptoms were detected by the former method.

The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia Besides detection, diagnosis of catatonia is a major problem. There is no consensus on what constitutes a catatonic syndrome, or how many signs and symptoms are necessary to make this diagnosis. The presence of one to four symptoms in a variety of combine sons has been proposed to diagnose catatonia. The diversity of views reflects the overall uncertainty about the whole catatonia concept. There is preliminary evidence that the classical two-syndrome—retarded and excited—model of catatonia is but a rough estimate. Factor and latent analytic studies have suggested four (p. 524) or six separate syndromes within the realm of catatonia depending on the characteristics of the patient population and the composition of the catatonic symptomatology 4 examined.

Subjective Experiences and the Inner World of # Patients with Catatonia The stunningly bizarre motor and behavioral manifestations of catatonia demand inter pretation and explanation. Kahlbaum (1973: 31–32) referred to, yet never elaborated on, the patient’s “very severe physical or mental stress” and the “intense struggle that went on in his mind,” as factors in the development of catatonia. Volt (1902 ) made an early at tempt to understand the catatonic symptomatology based on William James’s psychology cal theory.

Psychodynamic studies of catatonia, mainly extensive case reports, provide rare insights into the workings of the catatonic individual’s mind. The common thread of psychodynam ic interpretations of catatonia is the assumption that it is a miscarried, but eventually suc 5 cessful, solution to troublesome early childhood experiences.

While psychodynamic interpretations were squeezed out of mainstream psychiatry by the second part of twentieth century, the core idea of catatonia as a defense against over whelming threat in the form of psychotic experiences and anxiety has remained. Moskowitz (2004 ) argued for the similarities between catatonia and animals’ defensive tonic immobility from the viewpoints of cognitive neuroscience and evolutionary psycholo gy. The treatment response of catatonia to anti-anxiety benzodiazepines provides the Olin cal argument in Moskowitz’s hypothesis. However, only a subset of catatonic states is as sociated with anxiety and benzodiazepines are not a universally ef fictive treatment, although they remain the first-line treatment op 6 son for catatonia.

(p. 525) Conclusion Catatonia remains an elusive concept. There is still no other way of approximating the de finition of catatonia than following Jasper’s views, which requires the clinician to deli each catatonic signs and symptoms from both proven neurological symptoms and psycho The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia logically determined psychomotor phenomena and behavior. Beyond these etiological as sumptions, symptoms regarded catatonic must be persistent, dysfunctional, and idiosyn critic in relation to the person’s sociocultural environment, premorbid personality, and the current situation. Simple and complex mannerisms, posturing, mundane and bizarre perseverative stereotypes, echo-phenomena, and sudden impulsive acts constitute the core elements of Jaspersian catatonia. There is little evidence that these narrowly defined signs and symptoms form sharply defined clinical syndromes or accompanied by specific Effective or cognitive features.

Contemporary psychiatry pays scant attention to the subjective experiences of patients with catatonia. Traditional clinical wisdom holds that subjective experiences are not resat ed to motor symptoms. Patients are sometimes amnesic to the catatonic episode while others describe the frightening delusions and/or hallucinations that made them immobile or elicited frenzied excitement. Often patients cannot give any, or only 7 facile, explanations of the catatonic episode. Studies with large samples and comprehend chive methodology should be conducted to explore patients’ experiences during a catatonic episode. Such studies would enrich our understanding of the puzzling psychomotor phe novena subsumed under catatonia.

Psychoanalysis that influenced psychiatric research and practice for decades in the wen Kieth century relied on patients’ subjective experiences and their interpretations thereby contributing to the demise of descriptive psychopathology in general and the method of observation in particular.

The sorry state of the catatonia concept reflects the neglect of psychopathology as a fun damental basic science of clinical psychiatry. Mainstream psychiatry journals hardly ever publish papers on psychopathological topics; somehow it is assumed that the simplified symptom descriptions in diagnostic manuals such as in DSM-5 are the final word in psy chopathology. Within the overall marginalization of psychopathology, motor manifest sons of personality and those of the mental state have been the most overlooked in mod ern psychiatry. In clinical practice, simple movement disorders or complex behavioral pat terns, (p. 526) unless clearly drug-induced, are frequently dismissed as “it is just behave oral,” as though such symptoms were not integral part of “real” psychopathology. This is a serious omission. Glossing over the behavioral/observational aspects of psychopatholo gy deprives psychiatry of a host of phenomena that enhance our understanding of the dis eased mind and refines clinical presentations for neurobiological research.

Bibliography Akintomide G. S., Porter S. W., Pierce A.. “Catatonia in a Woman who is Profoundly Deaf-Mute: A Case Report.” The Psychiatrist 36: 418–421.

Angyal A.. “The Psychodynamic Process of Illness and Recovery in a Case of Data tonic Schizophrenia.” Psychiatry 13: 149–165.

Anonymous.. “Catatonia.” Lancet ii: 954–956.

The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, DSM 5. Washington: American Psychiatric Publishing. Arndt E.. “User die Gesichte der Katatonie.” Centralblatt fur Nervenheilkunde und Psychiatric XXV: 6–121. Bender K. G. and Feutrill J.. “Comatoid Catatonia.” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 34: 169–170. Barrios G. E.. The History of Mental Symptoms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bleuler E.. Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenics, trans. J. Zinkin. New York: International University Press. Bloomer D.. “Catatonia and the Neuroleptics: Psychobiologic Significance of Re mote and Recent Findings.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 38: 193–201. Bostroem A.. “Katatone Storungen. ” In O. Burke (ed.), Handbuch der Gas teskrankheiten. Vol. 2, pp. 134–205. Berlin: Stringer. Bush G., Fink M., Petrides G., Bowling F., and Francis A.. “Catatonia. I. Rating Scale and Standardized Examination.” Alta Psychiatric Scandinavia 93: 129–136. Caroff S. N., Mann S. C., Francis A., and Fricchione G. L.. Catatonia. Washington: American Psychiatric Press. Chalasani P., Mealy D., and Morris R.. “Presentation and Frequency of Catatonia in New Admissions to Two Acute Psychiatric Admission Units in India and Wales.” Psycho logical Medicine 35: 1667–1675. Chandrasena R. “Catatonic Schizophrenia: An International Comparative Study.” Canad an Journal of Psychiatry 31: 514–516. Critchley M.. “On Palilalia.” Journal of Neurology and Psychopathology 18: 23–31. Dabholkar P. O.. “Use of electroconvulsive therapy in Hysterical Catatonia.” British Journal of Psychiatry 153: 246–247. Fink M.. “Catatonia: A Syndrome Appears, Disappears and is Rediscovered.” Dana Xian Journal of Psychiatry 54: 437–445. Fink M. and Taylor M A.. Catatonia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hamilton M.. Fish’s Schizophrenia, 3rd. edn Bristol: Wright. Jasper K.. General Psychopathology. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Jensen P. S.. “Case Report of Conversion Catatonia: Indication for Hypnosis.” American Journal of Psychotherapy 38: 566–570.

The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, DSM 5. Washington: American Psychiatric Publishing. Arndt E.. “User die Gesichte der Katatonie.” Centralblatt fur Nervenheilkunde und Psychiatric XXV: 6–121. Bender K. G. and Feutrill J.. “Comatoid Catatonia.” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 34: 169–170. Barrios G. E.. The History of Mental Symptoms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bleuler E.. Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenics, trans. J. Zinkin. New York: International University Press. Bloomer D.. “Catatonia and the Neuroleptics: Psychobiologic Significance of Re mote and Recent Findings.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 38: 193–201. Bostroem A.. “Katatone Storungen. ” In O. Burke (ed.), Handbuch der Gas teskrankheiten. Vol. 2, pp. 134–205. Berlin: Stringer. Bush G., Fink M., Petrides G., Bowling F., and Francis A.. “Catatonia. I. Rating Scale and Standardized Examination.” Alta Psychiatric Scandinavia 93: 129–136. Caroff S. N., Mann S. C., Francis A., and Fricchione G. L.. Catatonia. Washington: American Psychiatric Press. Chalasani P., Mealy D., and Morris R.. “Presentation and Frequency of Catatonia in New Admissions to Two Acute Psychiatric Admission Units in India and Wales.” Psycho logical Medicine 35: 1667–1675. Chandrasena R. “Catatonic Schizophrenia: An International Comparative Study.” Canad an Journal of Psychiatry 31: 514–516. Critchley M.. “On Palilalia.” Journal of Neurology and Psychopathology 18: 23–31. Dabholkar P. O.. “Use of electroconvulsive therapy in Hysterical Catatonia.” British Journal of Psychiatry 153: 246–247. Fink M.. “Catatonia: A Syndrome Appears, Disappears and is Rediscovered.” Dana Xian Journal of Psychiatry 54: 437–445. Fink M. and Taylor M A.. Catatonia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hamilton M.. Fish’s Schizophrenia, 3rd. edn Bristol: Wright. Jasper K.. General Psychopathology. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Jensen P. S.. “Case Report of Conversion Catatonia: Indication for Hypnosis.” American Journal of Psychotherapy 38: 566–570.

The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia (p. 527) Johnson D. R.. “Representation of the Internal World in Catatonic Schizo phrenia.” Psychiatry 47: 299–314. Jones I. H.. “Observations on Schizophrenic Stereotypes.” Comprehensive Psychic try 6: 323–335. Kahlbaum K. L.. Catatonia. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Kraepelin E.. Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia. Edinburgh: E & S Livingstone. Kruger S., Baby R. M., Hoffler J., and Braunig P.. “Factor Analysis of the Catato nia Rating Scale and Catatonic Symptom Distribution Across Four Diagnostic Groups.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 44: 472–482. Bohr J. B. and Wisniewski A. A.. Movement Disorders: A Neuropsychiatric Ap roach. New York: Guilford. Moskowitz A. K.. “Scared stiff: Catatonia as an Evolutionary-Based Fear Re spouse.” Psychological Review 111: 984–1002. Northoff G.. Katatonie. Stuttgart: Eke. Northoff G., Krill W., Wenke J., Ravers H., and Plug B.. “Subjective Erleben in der Katatonie: systematische Untersuchung bei 24 katatonen Patienter.” Psychiatrische Praxis 23: 69–73. Northoff G., Koch A., Wenke J., et al.. “Catatonia as a Psychomotor Syndrome: A Rating Scale and Extrapyramidal Motor Symptoms.” Movement Disorders 14: 404–416. Oulis P. and Lykouras L.. “Prevalence and Diagnostic Correlates of DSM-fourth Data tonic Features Among Psychiatric Inpatients.” Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases 184: 378–379. Peralta fifth. and Cuesta M. J.. “Motor Features in Psychotic Disorders. I. Factor Structure and Clinical Correlates.” Schizophrenia Research 47: 107–116. Schneider K.. “User Ween und Bedeutung katatonischer Symptom.” Zeitschrift fur diegesamte Neurologie und Psychiatric 22: 486–505. Sienart P., Rooseleer J., and De Fruit J.. “Measuring catatonia: systematic review of rating scales.” Journal of Effective Disorders 135: 1–9. Stengel E.. “A Clinical and Psychological Study of Echo-Reactions.” Journal of Men tal Science 93: 598–612. Taylor M. A.. “Catatonia.” Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychology and Behavioral Neu Urology 3: 48–72.

The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia (p. 527) Johnson D. R.. “Representation of the Internal World in Catatonic Schizo phrenia.” Psychiatry 47: 299–314. Jones I. H.. “Observations on Schizophrenic Stereotypes.” Comprehensive Psychic try 6: 323–335. Kahlbaum K. L.. Catatonia. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Kraepelin E.. Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia. Edinburgh: E & S Livingstone. Kruger S., Baby R. M., Hoffler J., and Braunig P.. “Factor Analysis of the Catato nia Rating Scale and Catatonic Symptom Distribution Across Four Diagnostic Groups.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 44: 472–482. Bohr J. B. and Wisniewski A. A.. Movement Disorders: A Neuropsychiatric Ap roach. New York: Guilford. Moskowitz A. K.. “Scared stiff: Catatonia as an Evolutionary-Based Fear Re spouse.” Psychological Review 111: 984–1002. Northoff G.. Katatonie. Stuttgart: Eke. Northoff G., Krill W., Wenke J., Ravers H., and Plug B.. “Subjective Erleben in der Katatonie: systematische Untersuchung bei 24 katatonen Patienter.” Psychiatrische Praxis 23: 69–73. Northoff G., Koch A., Wenke J., et al.. “Catatonia as a Psychomotor Syndrome: A Rating Scale and Extrapyramidal Motor Symptoms.” Movement Disorders 14: 404–416. Oulis P. and Lykouras L.. “Prevalence and Diagnostic Correlates of DSM-fourth Data tonic Features Among Psychiatric Inpatients.” Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases 184: 378–379. Peralta fifth. and Cuesta M. J.. “Motor Features in Psychotic Disorders. I. Factor Structure and Clinical Correlates.” Schizophrenia Research 47: 107–116. Schneider K.. “User Ween und Bedeutung katatonischer Symptom.” Zeitschrift fur diegesamte Neurologie und Psychiatric 22: 486–505. Sienart P., Rooseleer J., and De Fruit J.. “Measuring catatonia: systematic review of rating scales.” Journal of Effective Disorders 135: 1–9. Stengel E.. “A Clinical and Psychological Study of Echo-Reactions.” Journal of Men tal Science 93: 598–612. Taylor M. A.. “Catatonia.” Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychology and Behavioral Neu Urology 3: 48–72.

The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia Ungvari G. S., Lung C. M., Wong M. K., and Lau J.. “Benzodiazepines in the treat Bent of the catatonic syndrome.” Alta Psychiatric Scandinavia 89: 285–288.

Ungvari G S., Chou H. F., Chow L. Y., Lau B. S., and Tang W. K. (1999a). “Lorazepam for chronic catatonia: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over study.” Psy chopharmacology 142: 393–398.

Ungvari G. S., Chow L. Y., Lung H. C. M., and Lay B. S. T. (1999b). “Rating Chronic Data Sonia: Discrepancy Between Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Assessment.” Revista de Psiquiatria Clinic 26: 56–61.

Ungvari G. S., Lung H. C. M., Chung H. B. B. K., and Lung T.. “Schizophrenia with Prominent Catatonic Feature (“Catatonic Schizophrenia”) I. Demographic and Blini cal Correlates in the Chronic Phase. Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology and Biology cal Psychiatry 29: 27–38.

Ungvari G. S., Noggins W., Lung S. K., Lee E., and Gerevich J.. “Schizophrenia with Prominent Catatonic Features (“Catatonic Schizophrenia”) third. Latent Class Analysis of (p. 528) the Catatonic Syndrome.” Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology and Biology cal Psychiatry 33: 81–85.

Van der Heijden F. M. M. A., Tinier S., Arts N. J. M., Hoogendroorn M. L. C., Hahn R. S., and Verhoeven W. M. A.. “Catatonia: Disappeared or Under-diagnosed.” Psy chopathology 38: 3–8.

Volt R.. “Zur Psychologies der katatonischen Symptom.” Centralblatt fur Nerve heilkunde und Psychiatric XXV: 433–437.

WHO.. ICD-10. Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Notes:

1 ( ) Then, fundamental questions arise. What, other than tradition, would differentiate catatonic signs/symptoms from other motor phenomena observed in neuropsychiatry? Why is echolalia a typical catatonic symptom and palilalia not? What is the added clinical value of calling a stupor “catatonic”? Further, what is the rationale for retaining the con Dept of catatonia at all? If most catatonic signs and symptoms are considered to result from “either damage to the frontal lobe motor regulatory system or damage to or disrupt son of function in subcortical structures”, then the logical solution would be to use the diagnostic term “catatonia” only in relation to presumably specific motor disorders associated with schizophrenia as a lucid editorial suggested.

2 ( ) Fish’s now less influential text on schizophrenia harks back to Jasper’s concept on catatonia: “Disorders of behavior... are often bizarre and cannot be easily understood as arising from the patient’s abnormal ideas” ( Hamilton 1984: 65). This is the approach followed by Kraepelin when he asserted that persistent “genuine catatonic morbid sump The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia toms” appeared only in dementia praecox ( Kraepelin 1919: 258). Kurt Schneider also came to the same conclusion following an extensive review of short-lived, catatonialike symptoms in healthy individuals and a variety of psychiatric disorders.

3 ( ) Jasper’s view also infers that the diagnosis of catatonia cannot be established without a neurological evaluation or the psychosocial background against which catatonia oc Burred. Manifestations of psychological conflicts leading to distress—still called “cover ion disorder” in ICD-10 although removed from DSM-5—would not qualify as catatonia because a meaningful connection and temporal link are present between cause and con sequence. (That is demonstrated in Julius’s case vignette at the start of this article.) The unease with diagnosing catatonia in such clinical presentations based on superficial Mimi Parities with persistent catatonic symptoms is reflected in the creation of oxymoron such as “hysterical catatonia” or “conversion catatonia”. This is not pure semantics. Enduring catatonic symptoms seen in schizophrenia differ from the fleeting psychomotor symptoms of anxiety or mood disorders not only phenomenological ly (Ungvari et al. 2005; but in treatment response and very likely in etiology.

4 ( ) The impact of ethnicity and culturally inherited patterns of expressive and reactive movements on the diagnosis of catatonia has not been extensively researched. Acute Data tonic symptomatology, mainly stuporous conditions, is more frequent in developed Noun tries or even in the offspring of patients who were born and brought up in the West. A recent comparative study confirmed the symptomatic difference between Indian and Welsh catatonic patients diagnosed according to the same methods. This area is a promising avenue for further research.

5 ( ) In a brilliant case history and review of the psychoanalytic literature, Johnson listed a few partly overlapping interpretations of catatonia. Catatonia is variously concept tualized as “ a regression to an intrauterine state in which an “end of the world ” fantasy is followed by an omnipotent rebirth fantasy, ” as “defiance and suppressed anger, ” as an “unresolved conflict between overly strict ego ideals and sexual and aggressive instincts, ” as an attempt to “ run away from danger ” and as “ primitive attempts to avoid responsibili ty for willed actions, originating in early childhood experiences in which the mother is overprotective and disapproving. ”

6 ( ) In an elegant essay applying Szondi’s views, Bloomer asserted that the apparent disappearance of catatonia coincided with the introduction of antipsychotic drugs, which suppressed the threatening paranoia and thereby replaced the self-healing attempt of catatonia and eliminated the catatonic symptomatology related to schizophrenia. No ex perimental study has tried to test Bloomer’s hypothesis.

7 ( ) The only systematic investigation of patients’ experiences during a catatonic attack in Solved 24 patients (15 with psychoses, 7 with mood disorders and 2 with encephalopathy) who retrospectively completed a 14-item self-assessment scale 3 weeks after recovering from a stupor. The scale covered the motor (e.g. “I had full control over my movements” ), cognitive (e.g. “I had many ideas in my mind ”), Effective (e.g. “I The Psychopathological Concept of Catatonia felt intense fear” ) and phenomenological (e.g. “I felt isolated from the world ”) aspects of the catatonic episode. The items consisted of two opposing statements (e.g. “I felt intense fear – I felt intense joy” ). The patients predominantly reported Effective (overwhelming anxiety) and cognitive (ambivalence and blocked willpower) subjective experiences, al though all four aspects were present in most patients. As expected, schizophrenia and mood disorder patients mainly belonged to the cognitive and Effective groups, respective ly. Similar studies with larger samples and more comprehensive methodology would en rich our understanding of the puzzling psychomotor phenomena subsumed under catato nia.

Labor S. Ungvari Labor S. Ungvari Department of Psychiatry, School of Public Health, Chinese University of Hong Kong Eating Behavior and its Disorders # Eating Behavior and its Disorders Giovanni Castellini and Waldo Wicca The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jun 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter examines the most representative pathological behaviors of the so-called feeding and eating disorders, with a particular attention to the psychopathological mean ing of the different behaviors. These behaviors, including restrictive diet, binge eating, purging, or obsessive control of body shape are generally adopted to define the broad cat gory of eating disorders. In particular, it is considered the trans-nosographic and dime signal approach to the eating disorder psychopathology, as most of the symptoms de Ascribed in this chapter can be observed also in different psychopathological conditions. The chapter considers the subjective transformation in patients of the original meaning of food and alimentation into something negative and dangerous, adopting a phenomenology cal approach to eating disorders.

Keywords: feeding and eating disorders, body image, self-identity, binge eating, compensatory behaviors, emotion al eating # Introduction FEEDING and eating disorders are included into a diagnostic category, encompassing dif ferment psychopathological conditions such as Anorexia Nervosa (anorexia nervosa), Bulimia Nervosa (bulimia nervosa), Binge Eating Disorder (binge eating disorder), Pica (defined as persistent craving and compulsive eating of non-food substances), Rumination Disorder, Avoidant/Restrictive food intake dis order. All these diagnoses are defined by patio logical eating behaviors combined in different patterns, and resulting in specific medical complications due to unbalanced assumption or absorption of food or purging behaviors, such as weight loss, obesity, heart or kidney failure, and hematological alterations.

When a person develops an eating disorder, nutrition is no longer anchored to its physio logical meaning—which is the process to acquire food by the living organism in order to meet its dynamic needs and energy demands—and the food loses its main value of our ishment or pleasure, rather it is considered as negative and potentially dangerous. Copse Eating Behavior and its Disorders quently, the power supply is no longer determined by a gut feeling of hunger or satiety, but it is both quantitatively and qualitatively based on arbitrary parameters (such as rigid rules, concept of control). Therefore, patients systematically underestimate or ignore the signals of hunger and satiety to adhere strictly to their diet.

Most of the symptoms described in this chapter can be observed also in different psy chopathological conditions, over the border of the category defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). For example, weight loss following re strictive behaviors is frequently reported in Melancholic Depression, as binge eating or hyperphagia are observed in several mood disorders. Body image disturbance is a transdiagnostic feature, which characterizes a plethora of different psychiatric disturbance such Body Dysmorphic Disorder, Major Depression, Social Anxiety, Gender Dysphoria, (p. 530) Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, and Schizophrenia. In order to attribute a patio logical eating behavior to an eating disorder diagnosis, it is important to consider the core psychopathology related to them, and the subjective world underpinning the Visor der. In other words, a phenomenological approach should take into account the reason why a young girl decides to restrict her diet, avoid specific foods, use food to manage her emotions, and begins checking compulsively her body.

In the present chapter, I will provide a schematic description of the main pathological fea Cures associated with feeding and eating disorders, with a particular attention to the psy chopathological meaning of the different behaviors.

Dieting and Food Restriction Many people begin their history of an eating disorder, by reducing or eliminating types of food from their diet, and restricting their dietary range. The way individuals decide to re Luce the variability of their alimentation is quite heterogeneous and could include a real desire to lose weight by eliminating “fattening food,” but can also be connected with veg etarianism, veganism, orthorexia (eating only “healthy food”), or specific modification of diet related to some pathologies (diabetes, food intolerance, celiac disease). An important feature of diet attempts in eating disorders is that it should be differentiated by the loss of appetite frequently observed in depression or other mood disorders. Once that dieting has started, it generally represents the core symptom of many pathological vicious cycles, also involving other pathological behaviors such as binge eating. It is also accompanied by different rituals, which sometimes characterize the whole day of the patient, such as weighing and measuring food, counting calories, eating specific food in a particular or der, use a particular bowl or glass, cutting food into small pieces, disassembling foods. The so-called forbidden foods included junk foods and fats, carbohydrates, meat, and sweets.

Why do persons with eating disorders start dieting? Psychodynamic and cognitive per spectives highlight the relationship between body image disturbances and the restraint behaviors, as an attempt to control weight and the body. Adverse life events, such as sexual or emotional abuse seem to represent factors associate Eating Behavior and its Disorders ed with the development of these behaviors (Jacobi et al. 2004; Castellini et al. 2014a, b). A phenomenological approach has recently been proposed, individuating the core psychopathological feature of eating disorders as a disorder of lived corporeality. In this perspective, most of the symptoms arise from this core di Pension. Accordingly, dieting begins as an attempt to overcome the alienation from one’s own body and from one’s own emotions. Indeed, many diet attempts are started to regain control of one’s own emotions, for those who are not able to cope with such emotions. Patients perceive dieting as the possible means to feel themselves on ly through objective measures and through self-starvation. Dieting is a part of the vicious cycle of maintenance of binge eating, as it creates a physiologic and psychological depri Cation that potentiates the eventual counter-regulation of appetite, leading to this behave ior.

(p. 531) Binge Eating: An Objective or Subjective # Definition?

Binge eating is the main symptom of Bulimia Nervosa (bulimia nervosa) and Binge Eating Disorder (binge eating disorder) and can be present also in binge/purging anorexia. In bulimia nervosa, it is associated with com pensatory behaviors, while in binge eating disorder, the compensatory behaviors are lacking or even spo radii. Frequently, the term binge eating is used to refer to a large quantity of food con Fumed in a short period of time, with a sense of loss of control. However, a person’s define ition of “large amount” is highly subjective and influenced by personal beliefs and rules, which can vary from day to day. Therefore, each attempt of finding a quantitative thresh old for this behavior has been unsuccessful. Independently from the theoretical back ground, there is a large consensus of considering this phenomenon an inherently subject Dive experience and a critical underlying attribute of binge eating episodes. The most accepted psychopathological and qualitative threshold for establish ing a discontinuation from normalcy of the behavior is the subjective experience of lack of control, which distinguishes binge eating from hyperphagia. Indeed, a person can experience an objective episode of binge eating as well as a subjective one, defined as an eating episode that is not object Lively large (approximately less than 500 calories), but that involves loss of control over eating. The sense of lack of con tool over the eating behavior, can refer not just to the quantity, but also the qualitative features of food (e.g. fat, salty, forbidden), the time (eating when I’m not planning to do so), and the people involved (“I dissociative identity disorder not want to eat in front of my boyfriend”). The subject Dive estimation of binge eating can be determined by the personal system of values Basso sated with food and any amount of food over a predetermined dietary rule could be per caved to be large or without control.

In a clinical setting we can assess loss of control according to questions such as: “Did you have a sense of loss of control at the time you had that meal?” “Could you have stopped eating once you started?” “Could you have prevented the episode from occurring?” Sever Eating Behavior and its Disorders al studies have demonstrated that the experience of loss of control over eating, as op posed to the amount of food eaten, appear to be more salient for the identification of dis ordered eating behaviors and related distress. This kind of observation highlights the importance of using the subjectiveness of the experience to understand the phenomenology of pathological eating behaviors. As well as the “large amount of food” required by the diagnostic criteria, the temporal boundary of the episode (eating in a discrete period of time, e.g. within any two-hour pe rod) is highly subjective and can be influenced by personal beliefs and rules. The most empirically well-supported models for eating disorders propose that concerns about body image and feelings following the loss of control over eating represent maintaining factors in the vicious cycle of binge eating. The negative emotions associated with body image disturbances perpetuate the obsessive drive for thinness, which in turn leads to unrealis tic dietary restraints. Binge eating occurs when dietary restraints are broken and the Pallor-nothing cognitive distortions lead the individual to engage in excessive eating. Copse quently, negative effects such as feelings of (p. 532) guilt, shame, disgust, and failure emerge and facilitate inappropriate compensatory behavior (e.g. vomiting or excessive exercise).

Accordingly, from a phenomenological perspective, the alternation of different eating be Saviors can be associated with a different experience of time. For many persons with bulimia nervosa or binge eating disorder, binge eating episode occurs in a very short period of time as a breakdown in the context of continuous control of eating habits. However, patients often report so-called binge eating days, during which they spend the whole time eating sweet things or craving or nibbling. The subjective perception of time during binge eating episodes is heterogeneous within patients, but generally, binge eating is experienced as a discontinuous moment in the normal time course. Sometimes, patients do not remember what they were doing, how long the episode lasted, or even what they ate. On the other hand, patients also report having planned their binge eating by buying different types of forbidden foods at the supermarket and then running to an isolated place to eat it, re treating into a mental state with an altered sense of time.

Being in Control Especially in anorexia and bulimia nervosa patients, the subjective perception of time ap pears to be interconnected with the construct of control. Time is perceived in different ways, on the basis of the interchange of control/loss of control phases. Indeed, the idea of lack of control over eating depends on what a person thinks is being in control of their eating. Patients always attempt to control every feature of their diet, such as the quantity and the quality of food (the so-called orthorexia ), the timing of their meals (“never eat pasta at dinner!”), the calorie content of each item of food, but also their body, with the obsessive thoughts and repetitive behaviors included in body checking. This includes the frequent pinching of hands around waist, arms, or stomach, weighing themselves, and Eating Behavior and its Disorders looking at themselves frequently in the mirror. The condition is not only present in eating disorder but also in body dysmorphia and obsessive-compulsive disorder.

The construct of control is mostly related to anxiety, and it has been conceptualized as anxious perception of low control over external threats and emotional reactions. Especial ly for anorexia nervosa patients, maintaining a sense of control by the continuous Joni Boring of eating and body weight and shape, and dietary restrictions can balance the sub jective perception of low degree of internal control and high external control exerted by family and society. Therefore, for some people with eating Visor Hers, perception of control over the body, eating habits, and physical exercise represent the way in which they can keep their emotions and relationships under control. It is note worthy that eating disorder patients have a different perception of time, mostly depend ing on their limited world. Indeed, the perspective on their life is reduced to what they have eaten or the fluctuation of their body weight: the world of relationships, job opportu niches, studies, and affects all fade into the background. A good example is provided by the way in which they remember periods in their life with sentences such as: “At that time I was happy, I dissociative identity disorder a lot of exercise, my nutrition was under control and I was thin... ” or “That period was one of the worst of my life... I was as fat as I’ve ever been.”

(p. 533) Regain Control: The Compensatory Behan # Tors The compensatory behaviors occur as a way to regain control, like an attempt to restore normalcy, and clean up the sense of guilt. Patients with bulimia or anorexia nervosa gen rally attempt to compensate for the calories consumed by different behaviors including self-vomiting, misuse of laxatives, enemas, colonies, and the use of diuretics. Physical ex excise or dieting are also used as a way to compensate the out-of-control eating behave Tors. Each loss of control can be related to shame, anxiety, or depression. Furthermore, compensatory behaviors are considered a way to regulate emotions in the same way as binge eating, similarly to other self-harm con ducts can be associated with other psychopathological conditions such as borderline per Tonality or mood disorders. These kinds of behaviors are particularly life-threatening as they increase the risk of heart failure, damage to the gastrointestinal system, or Alec trolytes alterations.

Emotional Eating: What is Behind Binge Eat # ing?

Emotional eating is defined as eating in response to a range of negative emotions such as anxiety, depression, anger, and loneliness, to cope with negative affect. Different emotional states often precede the onset of binge eating as well as of purging behaviors, and frequently after these episodes there is a Eating Behavior and its Disorders subsequent decrease in the negative affects. According to the socalled affect-driven models, the act of eating substitutes a less aversive Effective conj son (e.g. guilt after binge eating) for the more aversive emotional state (e.g. depression) which preceded the binge. Indeed, some of the pathological eating be Saviors should be considered as a consequence of a cognitive narrowing, which individu als use to escape from their awareness of negative emotional states and threats to their self-esteem.

This mechanism arises from a more general Effective regulation difficulty, which is a com mon trait of eating disorders. However, this psychopathological feature is also associated with borderline personality disorder, mood and anxiety Visor Hers, or different subthreshold conditions (night eating syndrome, subthreshold binge eating disorder, eating disorder not otherwise specified). Furthermore, emotion dysregulation and alexithymia are not only related with binge eating but also with restricted food consumption and compensatory behaviors, which could be interpret ed as responses to regulate intense or relatively undifferentiated emotional states, to re strict the Effective experience. or to take attention away from negative emotions.

According to a phenomenological interpretation of emotional eating, eating disorder pa taints complain about being alienated from their emotions, and from the somatic respond es of the body related to them. According to this model, the cen Aesthetic apprehension of one’s own body is the more primitive and basic form of selfawareness about one’s own emotions. Indeed, patients with eating disorders often report —with different levels of insight—their difficulties in perceiving their emotions, saying they (p. 534) do not “feel” themselves. Feeling extraneous from one’s own body may fea Cure as a possible factor for abnormal eating patterns via emotional dysregulation and/or the dysregulation of bodily-mediated satiety responsiveness.

Body Shape Concern and Body Image Distort # son: Disorders of Embodiment Many academics consider the “core psychopathology” of eating disorders as basically de termined by an excessive concern about body shape and weight, such that self-worth is judged largely or even exclusively in terms of satisfaction with weight and shape. Body image distortion—defined as “a disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced” —has been indicated as the psychopathological threshold between the world of eating disorders and normalcy, across a continuum of several heterogeneous features which can be found also in highrisk population or subclinical conditions. It is considered as a multidimensional pattern, including cognitive and Effective components (concern and feelings about the body), per caption (estimation of own body size), and behaviors related to one’s own body percep son. Shape concerns and body image distortion severity have been associated with different long-term outcomes to treatment.

Eating Behavior and its Disorders Body image disturbances are considered key to distinguishing between partially and fully recovered individuals and a healthier relationship with one’s body may be the final hurdle in recovery.

Shape concerns also have a crucial role in the vicious cycle of binge eating, promoting unrealistic dietary restraint, whose violation activates an all-or-none thinking (e.g. severe restraint or complete failure). This dichotomous thinking heightens a sense of frustration, disinhibits the attempts to control food eaten, and leads to binge eat ing. Body uneasiness and body image disturbance are present in several psychopathology cal disorders such as depression and schizophrenia, as well as body dysmorphic disorder. In particular, it has been observed as a core feature also in particular conditions such as gender dysphoria. However, recent phenomenological approaches have attempted to clarify the spe civic significance of body image disturbance in eating disorders. According to this psi son, most of the pathological eating behaviors can be considered as secondary epiphe novena to a more profound pathological core, based on the relationship between lived corporeality and self-identity. In this sense, the overestimation of the importance of bodily appearance overcomes the other aspects of existence and personal identity. Persons with eating disorders are affected by a more profound disturbance consisting in disorders of the way they experience their own body (embodiment), and shape their own identity. The lived body ( lab) is what allows the “belonging to the world, being in the world temporal ty committed”. The primary contact with the world is the socalled field of presence, the lab with its own temporality, in which all our actions take place.

Shape concerns also have a crucial role in the vicious cycle of binge eating, promoting unrealistic dietary restraint, whose violation activates an all-or-none thinking (e.g. severe restraint or complete failure). This dichotomous thinking heightens a sense of frustration, disinhibits the attempts to control food eaten, and leads to binge eat ing. Body uneasiness and body image disturbance are present in several psychopathology cal disorders such as depression and schizophrenia, as well as body dysmorphic disorder. In particular, it has been observed as a core feature also in particular conditions such as gender dysphoria. However, recent phenomenological approaches have attempted to clarify the spe civic significance of body image disturbance in eating disorders. According to this psi son, most of the pathological eating behaviors can be considered as secondary epiphe novena to a more profound pathological core, based on the relationship between lived corporeality and self-identity. In this sense, the overestimation of the importance of bodily appearance overcomes the other aspects of existence and personal identity. Persons with eating disorders are affected by a more profound disturbance consisting in disorders of the way they experience their own body (embodiment), and shape their own identity. The lived body ( lab) is what allows the “belonging to the world, being in the world temporal ty committed”. The primary contact with the world is the socalled field of presence, the lab with its own temporality, in which all our actions take place.

As further support to this position, it has been observed that the temporal continuity of the representation of the body is altered in patients with eating disorders. Time is no longer intentionality, and therefore it cannot be a way for being with the others in a si multaneity or (p. 535) in a succession temporality. Indeed, patients with eating disorders report their feeling that the body can change continuously. Time is reduced to a mere control function, in particular to be employed in control and/or loss of control of weight and eating—in other words to monitoring one’s own body over time. For example, pa taints often make statements like: “I spend most of my time in front of the mirror to con tool my body,” or “the perception of time depends on body control. My body is under con tool all the times. I fail, at times, miserably and at times I am successful, but I would like to be successful all the time,” or “One morning I feel my thighs fit perfectly in my pants, another morning instead they have become huge.” Clinicians should always take into con sideration the situational and temporal variations of body image experiences of individu als with eating disorders. Specific situations or events activate patients’ thoughts and emotions, while at other times these body image experiences are either absent or much more benign. Cash and Pruzinsky highlighted that body image must be considered as a fluid and dynamic person–situation interaction (or transaction), and it is of note that this fluid versus static issue has long permeated much of psychology, especially the do Eating Behavior and its Disorders main of personality theory. Understanding the dynamic interplay of body image and con textual events is crucial for the appreciation of body image fluidity in everyday life.

Conclusion A phenomenological approach to eating disorders is aimed at understanding the subject Dive meaning of the so-called “pathological eating behaviors.” In this perspective, dietary restraint or binge eating are not just symptoms challenging the lives of patients, which should be removed as soon as possible; rather they represent a “door” through which to explore the way these individuals have shaped their personal identity, around embody Bent. Accordingly, a comprehensive assessment of a person with eating disorders should encompass more than the simple behavioral assessment required for a DSM diagnosis, and it should include the person’s general way of perceiving their own body and their lived corporeality. Moreover, clinicians should evaluate the consequences of this core di Pension on other areas of the patient’s life, such as the significance of the illness and the body in inter-subjective interactions as well as identity definition, space perception, and the way they experience time, associated with several features of eating disorders (such as binge eating and weight control).

An accurate psychopathological assessment in eating disorders is crucial from a clinical point of view for several reasons. First, psychopathology allows for a definition of a quail Dative threshold along a continuum of severity, identifying healthy subjects from high-risk persons with abnormal eating behaviors in the general population, and non-clinical per sons with abnormal eating behaviors from eating disorders in a clinical setting. Further more, the core features of eating disorders have been associated with different responses to psychological treatments and a different course of illness. In other words, while jag noses do not seem to represent adequate outcome predictors, psychopathological dime ions identify subpopulations of people with eating disorders with different trajectories across time, and therefore different maintaining factors and pathogenic mechanisms. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychiatry Matthew Radcliffe The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article addresses the similarities and differences between forms of experience Basso sated with grief and major depression. It is conceded that both typical grief and major depression are phenomenologically diverse, and that there is no prospect of making a neat, clear-cut distinction between the two. Nevertheless, the article identifies three im portent differences that serve to distinguish most experiences of grief from most expert Fences of depression. First of all, depression, but not grief, involves losing experiential ac Bess to certain types of significant possibility. Second, grief involves dynamic perspectiveshifting, whereas depression involves an inability to shift perspective. Third, grief in Solves a sustained ability to relate to and feel connected with other people, the capacity for which is substantially diminished in depression.

Keywords: depression, experience of possibility, grief, interpersonal connection, perspective-shifting # Introduction PHENOMENOLOGICAL research has much to contribute to our understanding of grief. In what follows, I will illustrate this by focusing specifically on psychiatry, where there is particular need for phenomenological clarification. This need is exemplified by debates that arose in the run-up to publication of DSM-5, concerning the proposed guidelines for distinguishing grief from major depression. In DSM-fourth, it is acknowledged that the sump toms of grief overlap with those of depression. However, a depression diagnosis is exclude ed in cases where symptoms are “better accounted for by Bereavement” (DSM-fourth, TR: 1 356). The proposal that this clause be removed from DSM-5 proved divisive. For exam ple, Wakefield and First supported retention of a revised bereavement exclusion clause, maintaining that “bereavement-related depressions” should be distinguished from major depressive episodes in many instances where symptoms would otherwise meet the diagnostic criteria for depression. In contrast, Zisook and Shear (2009: 70–71) insisted that the vast majority of bereavement experiences do differ from experiences of major de The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try precision. Where they do not differ, their trajectories and responsiveness to treatment do not differ either. So an exclusion clause is unwarranted, given that a person can be both 2 bereaved and depressed.

(p. 539) In the light of such exchanges, the need for phenomenological research is clear. If the phenomenology of “normal” or “typical” grief cannot be reliably distinguished from that of major depression, then any proposed distinction must be based on additional, nonphenomenological criteria. On the other hand, if there are significant phenomenological 3 differences between the two, such criteria may not be required. This need for phenom nological clarification is not specific to the DSM debates and applies much more widely. The questions of (a) whether and how the various forms of depression and grief are phe nomenologically distinct from each other, and (b) whether any phenomenological differ Fences are indicative of different trajectories and outcomes, are relevant to any attempt to classify, further understand, and respond to grief and depression, in clinical contexts and more generally.

Ultimately, DSM-5 settled for something that strikes me as rather unsatisfactory. It is stated that, although a response to loss may seem “understandable or appropriate,” a depression diagnosis should still be “carefully considered” where symptoms overlap. This requires “the exercise of clinical judgment,” something that should take individual history and the specifics of the situation into account. In a footnote, there is also an attempt to draw some phenomenological distinctions. Grief, it is noted, tends to involve “feelings of emptiness and loss,” while depression involves “depressed mood and the inability to an ticipate happiness or pleasure.” Positive emotions still arise during grief, while depress ion is more pervasive and persistent. In addition, grief usually involves retention of selfesteem, which sets it apart from the worthlessness and self-loathing more typical of de 4 precision. Thoughts of dying also differ in content: the depressed person may feel that she does not deserve to live, while the bereaved person is more likely to think of joining the deceased.

Ultimately, DSM-5 settled for something that strikes me as rather unsatisfactory. It is stated that, although a response to loss may seem “understandable or appropriate,” a depression diagnosis should still be “carefully considered” where symptoms overlap. This requires “the exercise of clinical judgment,” something that should take individual history and the specifics of the situation into account. In a footnote, there is also an attempt to draw some phenomenological distinctions. Grief, it is noted, tends to involve “feelings of emptiness and loss,” while depression involves “depressed mood and the inability to an ticipate happiness or pleasure.” Positive emotions still arise during grief, while depress ion is more pervasive and persistent. In addition, grief usually involves retention of selfesteem, which sets it apart from the worthlessness and self-loathing more typical of de 4 precision. Thoughts of dying also differ in content: the depressed person may feel that she does not deserve to live, while the bereaved person is more likely to think of joining the deceased.

Why is this unsatisfactory? The first thing to note is the frequent use of qualifiers such as 5 “likely to,” “tend to,” and “generally,” which appear eight times in the footnote. That an instance of condition A tends to or is likely to involve symptoms p, q, and r, while an in stance of condition B is less likely to or tends not to involve those symptoms does not fa Militate a confident diagnosis of “A and not B.” Furthermore, this uncertainty is unavoid able, given that the diagnostic criteria for a major depressive episode admit considerable heterogeneity. A range of different predicaments could qualify as “major depression” by meeting at least one of the two principal criteria (depressed mood and diminished inter est in activity), plus at least four of seven supplementary criteria. Indeed, three of the supplementary criteria are disjunctive: weight loss or gain; insomnia or hypersomnia; psychomotor agitation or retardation (DSM-5: 160–161). By relying on permissive criteria such as these, a particular grief experience might be easy enough to distinguish from a depression experience of one or another type, but not from all the other experiences that are compatible with a major depression diagnosis.

The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try First-person descriptions of depression and grief are often very similar to each other. In both cases, the person may report a lack of interest in activities, a sense of estrangement (p. 540) from other people and social situations, feelings of meaningless and hopelessness, 6 bodily discomfort, fatigue, and changes in the experience of time, amongst other things. However, I think the apparent similarity is often symptomatic of under-description. In or der to determine whether or not a grief exclusion clause is required, it is not enough to appeal to the success or failure of cursory diagnostic criteria. Where they fail, there re mains the possibility that a more detailed and discriminating phenomenological analysis will succeed. I am not suggesting that we should aspire toward a neat boundary, with grief on one side and major depression on the other: boundaries will always be blurred and there will be plenty of in-between cases. Hence a degree of idealization is inevitable. However, this does not prohibit robust phenomenological distinctions. That there are cas es falling in between A and B need not detract from the claim that A and B are structural ly very different, any more than the existence of Frey detracts from the distinction be tween black and white. And the ability to make clear, principled phenomenological dis tinctions can aid one in determining whether a given case is more like one or the other. Thus, as Pies (2012 ) points out, an “in depth understanding” of the phenomenology is needed, of a kind that “symptom checklists” do not facilitate. I have no doubt that many clinicians are already operating with something like this, in a way that has not yet been codified. However, this in itself is not a reason to dismiss the need for explicit phenom nological work, at least on the assumption that it is a good thing to be able to commune ate the basis for one’s clinical decisions and to formulate shared standards for diagnosis.

In addressing the phenomenology of grief, it is important to keep two issues distinct: (i) whether and how typical grief differs from major depression and other psychiatric conj sons; (ii) where and how the line should be drawn between normality and pathology. Even if typical grief could be distinguished from all forms of psychiatric illness, it might still be regarded as pathological according to one or another criterion. The phenomenological question is not only distinct from but also importantly prior to the question of pathology. If we want to assess whether or not a condition is pathology cal, it helps to have a good grasp of what that condition is. So lack of clarity over whether and how it is distinct from something else is not a good starting point. Phenomenology therefore has an important role to play in refining our sense of what the relevant phenom ena actually are, given that neither grief nor depression are currently conceived of in wholly non-phenomenological terms.

In the remainder of this article, I will take some preliminary steps toward a comparative phenomenological analysis. This will involve sketching three important differences be tween experiences of “typical” grief and major depression: 1 Grief involves losing systems of possibility, while depression involves losing access to kinds of possibility.

2 Grief involves dynamic perspective-shifting, whereas depression involves an inabili ty to shift perspective.

The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try 3 Grief involves a sustained ability to relate to and feel connected with other people, 7 the capacity for which is substantially diminished in depression.

(p. 541) In both grief and depression, 1 to 3 should not be construed as separable compo Bents of experience that just happen to accompany each other, and neither is the relation ship between them a causal one. They are inextricable aspects of a unitary structure; each implies the others. I concede that major depression is heterogeneous, a point that I have addressed at length elsewhere. The same applies to grief; even “typ cal grief” no doubt encompasses a range of subtly different (and perhaps, in some cases, substantially different) kinds of experience. So, when describing the phenomenology of typical grief, there is inevitably a degree of abstraction and simplification. Even so, de precision experiences have in common a pervasive sense of isolation, lack of dynamism, 8 and loss of possibility. This can be contrasted with the underlying structure of “normal” or “typical” grief, and—I will add—“complicated” grief. DSM-5’s remarks on comparative phenomenology are admittedly suggestive of the relevant phenomenological differences and can no doubt aid differential diagnosis. But there remains the risk of superficially similar symptom descriptions obscuring profound differences in how a person relates to the world as a whole and to other people, and of different descriptions obscuring com Tonalities. Phenomenological analysis provides insight into underlying structural differ Fences between grief and depression experiences, thus facilitating a more discerning in terpretation of first-person reports. What I will say here is very much a starting point, and it is somewhat schematic. My aims are to illustrate the role that phenomenological re search can play here, and to sketch some potentially fruitful themes to explore, rather 9 than to finish the job.

Projects and Possibilities Profound grief involves what I will call “loss of a system of possibilities.” Nearly all of one’s projects and pastimes can depend for their intelligibility on a relationship with a particular person. When one is confronted by that person’s irrevocable absence, they col lapse. Consider the event of losing a partner. Person A’s activities may implicate her part ner, B, in a range of ways. In a case of goal-directed action, A might do something be cause B has asked her to do it, because B needs her to do it, because B cares about the outcome, so that B can accomplish something else, so that a life shared with B is sus Gained or enhanced, and so forth. In many cases, it is not “I” who does something alone, but “we” who do it together for reasons that are “ours.” It is “we” who care about a given outcome, “we” who have made and continue (p. 542) to affirm certain commitments, “we” who depend on each other’s support to get things done. This dependence is not restricted to goal-directed activities and the larger projects in which they are embedded. Take the case of going to a cinema simply to enjoy a film. Here too, B may be implicated through out. Enjoying the film involves a sense of watching it with B and sharing in an experience. The two parties may interpret the film together, while they watch it and also afterwards. Even when B is not present, A may think about how B would react to the film, and A’s en joyment of it may stem, in part, from being able to tell B about it afterwards and con The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try strict an appraisal of it in conversation with B. More generally, how a situation matters to A and the kinds of action it demands from her are symptomatic of cares and concerns that only make sense given her relationship to B. The point extends to how the world ap pears to A and the degree to which she feels comfortably immersed in it. Regardless of whether or not we want to insist that specifically sensory perception of our surroundings incorporates a sense of how things matter to us, it is plausible to maintain that we expert Once our surroundings as significant, as mattering, in a range of ways. We do not ordinal ily need to explicitly infer the significance of a situation from a prior experience of it. Giv en different sets of projects, cares, and concerns, an entity or situation might appear practically salient to us in any number of ways—as something that could enhance or inter fair with a project, as interesting, enticing, exciting, disappointing, or threatening.

A wholesale collapse of practical meanings would therefore involve experiencing the world and one’s practical relationship to it in a profoundly different manner, and this is exactly how experiences of bereavement are often described. One loses a system of sig nificant possibilities that was previously integral to the experienced world and served to regulate one’s activities, thus making it “impossible for us to actively engage in the world just as we had before the death” ( Attic 2004: 350). For this reason, Parse (1981: 6) de scribes grief as a “cosmic crisis.” Our lives, he says, can be so bound up with the lives of others that they “scarcely belong to us.” In the event of a particular person’s death, a sys tem of possibilities that operated as a backdrop to meaningful activity is lost and the 10 world is profoundly different. This is a prominent theme in every autobiographical ac count of grief that I have come across, and is something that people express in a variety of ways. For example, Oates (2011: 176) writes, “Without meaning, the world is things. And these things multiplied to infinity.” Her account emphasizes how, when one grieves, entities in general appear bereft of the practical meanings they once had. Every thing therefore looks strange, somehow different. Instead of being greeted by objects and situations that are relevant in the light of one’s concerns, one encounters bare, indiffer ent “things.”

All of this appears markedly similar to losses of possibility that feature in first-person ac counts of depression. However, there is a distinction to be drawn between losing a “sys tem of possibilities” and losing access to “types of possibility.” For instance, no longer be ing able to hope for something or other differs from no longer being able to entertain an attitude of the kind “hope.” The type of grief experience I have described involves the for mer. One no longer finds things significant in the ways one dissociative identity disorder, and one can no longer sustain a system of hopes (p. 543) that depended upon one’s relationship with the de ceased. It could even be that a system of possibilities is eroded to such an extent that all hopes with a specific content, the hope for this and the hope for that, are lost. Even so, one remains capable of finding things practically significant, capable of hoping. At the very least, what endures is an inchoate sense that life could one day be better than it cur 11 Gently is. The point applies equally to goal-directed projects, enjoyable pastimes, and so forth.

A wholesale collapse of practical meanings would therefore involve experiencing the world and one’s practical relationship to it in a profoundly different manner, and this is exactly how experiences of bereavement are often described. One loses a system of sig nificant possibilities that was previously integral to the experienced world and served to regulate one’s activities, thus making it “impossible for us to actively engage in the world just as we had before the death” ( Attic 2004: 350). For this reason, Parse (1981: 6) de scribes grief as a “cosmic crisis.” Our lives, he says, can be so bound up with the lives of others that they “scarcely belong to us.” In the event of a particular person’s death, a sys tem of possibilities that operated as a backdrop to meaningful activity is lost and the 10 world is profoundly different. This is a prominent theme in every autobiographical ac count of grief that I have come across, and is something that people express in a variety of ways. For example, Oates (2011: 176) writes, “Without meaning, the world is things. And these things multiplied to infinity.” Her account emphasizes how, when one grieves, entities in general appear bereft of the practical meanings they once had. Every thing therefore looks strange, somehow different. Instead of being greeted by objects and situations that are relevant in the light of one’s concerns, one encounters bare, indiffer ent “things.”

All of this appears markedly similar to losses of possibility that feature in first-person ac counts of depression. However, there is a distinction to be drawn between losing a “sys tem of possibilities” and losing access to “types of possibility.” For instance, no longer be ing able to hope for something or other differs from no longer being able to entertain an attitude of the kind “hope.” The type of grief experience I have described involves the for mer. One no longer finds things significant in the ways one dissociative identity disorder, and one can no longer sustain a system of hopes (p. 543) that depended upon one’s relationship with the de ceased. It could even be that a system of possibilities is eroded to such an extent that all hopes with a specific content, the hope for this and the hope for that, are lost. Even so, one remains capable of finding things practically significant, capable of hoping. At the very least, what endures is an inchoate sense that life could one day be better than it cur 11 Gently is. The point applies equally to goal-directed projects, enjoyable pastimes, and so forth.

The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try What people with diagnoses of major or severe depression often describe is superficially similar to this but importantly different: an experience of losing the capacity for hope or for certain kinds of hope, of losing the ability to find anything significant in one or anoth er way. As with grief, this permeates how one experiences and relates to the world. But there is a sense of stasis, inescapability, irrevocability, which sets it apart from losing a system of possibilities. Hence there are two qualitatively different ways in which life might seem pointless and activities meaningless. One could lose a token system of poss Abilities, of a kind that sustains specific projects and patterns of activity, or one could lose phenomenological access to types of possibility, to the sense that anything ever could be relevantly different from the present in a good way, that any project ever could be sus trainable. First-person accounts of clinical depression generally indicate the latter: When I’m depressed life never seems worth living. I can never think about how my life is different from when I’m not depressed. I think that my life will never change and that I will always be depressed. Thinking about the future makes my depress ion even worse because I can’t bear to think of being depressed my whole life. I forget what my life is like when I’m not depressed and feel that my life and future is pointless.

When depressed I feel I have no future and lose any hope in things improving in my life. I just feel generally hopeless.

There seemed to be no future, no possibility that I could ever be happy again or that life was worth living.

Life will never end, or change. Everything is negative. I lose my imagination, in particular, being able to imagine any different state other than depression. Life is 12 a chore.

Having “no future” is also a prominent theme in many accounts of grief, but there is a dif Terence between an inchoate, uncertain future that is bereft of possibilities one previous ly took for granted and a future that no longer incorporates the possibility for any kind of 13 positive change. It can be added that the experience of losing a system of possibilities in grief is at the (p. 544) same time the experience of a particular person’s irrevocable ab Fence. The deceased was not simply a worldly entity that one cared deeply about (and continues to care deeply about) but also a condition of intelligibility for a world that was once taken for granted, for a system of significant possibilities that were once integral to the experienced environment. The death of these possibilities is inextricable from the death of the person; a singular experience is both localized and all-enveloping. This com bination of specificity and generality is, in my view, of considerable philosophical interest. It is commonplace in philosophy to distinguish between intentional states that have a spe civic object, such as perceiving or remembering something in particular, and diffuse states that have a much more general object, such as the world as a whole, or perhaps no object at all. For instance, we might distinguish an emotion of fearing something specific from a more enveloping feeling or mood of anxiety. Yet a singular experience of grief is fo used upon the loss of a particular person and, at the same time, amounts to a profound The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try change in how one experiences and relates to the world as a whole. So grief does not con firm to a distinction between specifically focused and more diffuse experiences.

Despite the all-enveloping structure of grief, it does not involve loss of access to kinds of possibility (at least not to the same kinds of possibility that are lost in depression). There is a difference between no longer finding a wide range of entities and situations signify cant in a particular way and experiencing the world as altogether bereft of a certain kind of significance. In the latter case, nothing appears significant in that way and it also seems that nothing ever could. The world of grief therefore has a particularity to it that the world of depression lacks. Even where an experience of depression does seem to have a specific object, the alteration in one’s sense of the possible is further-reaching and not implied in the same way by that object. Of course, it might be objected that major depress ion is also diagnosed in certain cases where systems of possibility, rather than types, are lost. This is surely so, but one could respond that it should not be. These two broad kinds of predicament are qualitatively different in structure. If major depression does accom modate both, then the category needs to be applied in a more restrictive or discerning way, thus distinguishing depression experiences where certain types of possibility are lost from superficially similar experiences, including many of those that arise during grief.

Perspective-shifting The contrast between losing systems and types of possibility points to a further difference between grief and depression: experiences of grief have a process structure that depress ion lacks. To quote C. S. Lewis (1966: 50), “I thought I could describe a state; make a map of sorrow. Sorrow, however, turns out to be not a state but a process.” Of course, it can be added that depression has a process structure too. Even if the world is expert Inced as bereft of the potential for meaningful, positive change, people still become de pressed, recover from depression, fall back into depression, and experience different de Crees or kinds of depression in succession. But my emphasis here is on the phenomenolo gy: grief is experienced in a more dynamic way. The world of severe depression is expert Inced as unchanging and inescapable; one cannot adopt a perspective outside of it; one cannot relive or imagine something that one could contrast with it. Grief, on the other hand, involves intensified interaction between contrasting and often conflicting perspex Dives. It is not the case that someone dies and (p. 545) a system of possibilities vanishes in stantaneously. The bereaved person continues to anticipate things in a habitual, practical way, drifting into patterns of activity and thought that somehow implicate the deceased. These are then disrupted by the dawning recognition of loss. There is what we might call an experience of negation: one habitually anticipates certain things and is then confront ed by the impossibility of one’s expectations ever being fulfilled. Hence there is an Bongo ing tension between competing ways of finding oneself in the world, different perspecti val structures: Later, at the motel, I stand in the darkened living room and stare out at the dark ocean—a stretch of beach, pale sand—vapor-clouds and a glimpse of the moon— The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try the conviction comes over me suddenly Ray can’t see this, Ray can’t breathe...

As I’ve been thinking, in restaurants, staring at menus, forced to choose some thing to eat. This is wrong. This is cruel, selfish. If Ray can’t eat...

(Oates 2011: 244)

Furthermore, the bereaved person continues to remember what the world was like before the death. She can also imagine a counterfactual world where the death has not oc Burred. So her current predicament is experienced as contingent; it could have been oth erwise. We should not conceive of these conflicting and contrasting perspectives as fully separate from each other; it is not simply that perspective a follows b, which follows c. Perspectives overlap, interact, and are reshaped in the process. Peter Goldie makes an in Rightful comparison with free indirect style in literary narratives and elsewhere, a way of writing that combines internal and external perspectives on a situation, usually those of author and character. He proposes that autobiographical memory involves a psychology cal analogue of this, something that is especially salient in grief: When you grieve, you often look back on the past, on your time together with the person you loved, knowing now what you dissociative identity disorder not know then: that the person you loved is now dead, and that you now know the manner and time of the dying...

autobiographical narrative thinking can reveal or express both one’s internal and external perspective on one’s tragic loss, so that these two perspectives are inter twined through the psychological correlate of free indirect style.

(Goldie 2012: 65–66)

Hence the gulf and the conflict between the world at time 1 and the world at time 2 is in tegral to the experience. When recalling time spent with the deceased, memories are in feted with the present. Yet they also include a sense of one’s current perspective as a contingent one, as something that differs in a profound way from how things once were and how they might have been. Goldie further proposes that the narratives one constructs and revises during grief are inextricable from the grieving process and give it a meaningful unity. Grief is partly constituted by a variably coherent, dynamic story that envelops, connects, and reshapes the various different perspectives. It is plausible, in my view, to construe this narration process in terms of the negotiation and reconciliation of perspectives. In contrasting past with present and re-narrating one’s memories in the light of the present, one fosters coherence, a sense of past and present as quite different and yet integrated into a unitary perspective upon one’s life.

Depression, in contrast, involves a substantially diminished ability to shift perspectives in this way. One cannot “see outside”; things could not be otherwise. One might remember that (p. 546) things were not always like this, but one cannot rekindle a sense of what it was like or imagine what it would be like for them to be different. Lack of access to types of possibility applies not only to current experiences of and thoughts about one’s sur Poundings but also to memories, imaginings, and expectations. Hence the narratives of those who are currently depressed often lack the movement between points of view that The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try we find in first-person accounts of grief and in autobiography more generally. Byron Good (1994: 153–155) observes that illness narratives usually include “multiple perspex Dives and disparate points of view, all representing aspects of the narrator’s experience and the possibility of diverse readings of what had happened and what the future might hold.” The point applies equally to grief. Indeed, given the gulf between before and after, the divergent points of view are especially “disparate” in grief. But Good goes on to note that this structure, this “quality of subjunctivity and openness to change,” is absent from “narratives of the tragic and hopeless cases.” Grief thus involves a sense of contingency (it was otherwise; it could have been otherwise) that is lacking in depression. This is not to suggest that depression, insofar as it involves a more profound loss of possibility, must also involve greater distress. The grieving person is capable of imagining a world where the death dissociative identity disorder not happen. She might run through events in agonizing detail, wonder how they could have turned out differently, and think about what she might have—or not have —said and done. Moreover, the contrast between the world as it was and the world she now inhabits is ever-present to her, in the guise of habitual dispositions to act, ways of seeing things, and ways of thinking that she lapses into and then experiences as negated. A dining table that appears to her as it would have done were B alive, as though B were there for dinner tonight, there to talk through the day’s activities over a bottle of wine and a meal, is then recognized as somehow illusory; its qualities shift. The transition be tween these experiences adds up to a painful feeling of absence, lack, or negation, which differs from a more pervasive and constant sense of absence that arises in depression. This is not to deny that depression also involves feelings of absence. For instance, one might remain able to anticipate —in some way—experiencing certain types of possibility, even though one is unable to experience them. Consequently, one is constantly confront ed by a world that appears lacking. Even so, these two broad kinds of absence-experience are quite different in character.

Interpersonal Connection Altered experiences of, and relations with, other people are implied throughout what I have so far described. In grief, projects collapse (to varying degrees) because they de pend on a relationship with a particular person. And the interplay between competing perspectives involves a continuing recognition of what it is to relate to someone in that kind of way. In the case of depression, it is not so much that a specific relationship is lost; the sense of being able to enter into a type of interpersonal relation is eroded. There is a sense of insurmountable isolation from people in general: “when we experience everyday sorrow, we generally feel—or at least are capable of feeling—intimately connected with others.... In contrast, when we experience severe depression, we typically feel outcast and alone” ( Pies 2008: 3). This isolation is inseparable from a sense of the world as bereft of possibilities for meaningful action. Almost all of our activities implicate other people in some way. Without any prospect of the relevant kinds of interpersonal relation, these ac tivities become unsustainable.

The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try (p. 547) I do not wish to imply that, following bereavement, a person continues to “feel connected” to people in general. She may feel profoundly isolated from everyone or al most everyone. Nevertheless, there remains an enduring sense of connection with the de ceased. The “continuing bonds” literature makes a convincing case for the view that topi cal or normal grief does not—or at least need not—involve ultimately “letting go” of the deceased, ceasing to address her, relate to her, feel connected to her. Continuing Bela sons with the dead are ubiquitous and healthy. Rather than “disengaging” from the Bela tionship, it is renegotiated to varying degrees and in different ways (Lass, Silverman, and Hickman (eating disorders.) 1996 ). There are several aspects to this. For instance, one might con tine to communicate with the deceased, something that may or may not include an exp rience of reciprocity. It is also frequently observed that the bereaved engage in “search ing behaviors” (e.g. Parches 1998: chapter 4). Furthermore, when one habitually antis pates or actively seeks out the deceased, one may find him. Sensed presence experiences are not uncommon, and a range of more specific sensory perceptual experiences can also arise. Indeed, it has been reported that, in some cultures, perceptual or per caption-like experiences of the deceased follow spousal bereavement in up to 90% of cas es. It is debatable whether, when, and why such rec sons should be regarded as pathological.

On the other hand, grief also involves repeated confrontations with the absence of the de ceased. There is thus a complicated, dynamic interplay of presence and absence, involve ing habitual anticipation and its negation, perceptual and quasi-perceptual experiences of presence and absence, and a sense that the world as a whole is somehow lacking. But, throughout all of these experiences, one retains the capacity to enter in to a type of second-person relation with others, of a kind that involves feelings of conned son, mutual recognition, and sharing. What is lacking and recognized as lacking is the ability to relate to a particular individual, at least in the way one once dissociative identity disorder. Depression ex periences, in contrast, involve an experienced inability to enter into that kind of relation with other people, to “feel connected” to anyone: They seem far away, hard to relate to them.

Nobody understand or loves me.

There is the realization you have never connected with anybody, truly, in your life.

Family are self centered and shaming, either ignore comments which don’t fit with their picture of how things should be going or they decide that shaming you into “pulling yourself together” will sort it out.

I feel detached from them.

People change from being people who I love and am connected with to being hosts 14 of a parasite—me. I can’t see why anyone would like me want me love me.

Of course, a depression narrative may emphasize a relationship—or lack thereof—with one or more specific individuals. But there is also a wider-ranging change in the structure The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try of interpersonal experience, an inability to enter into kinds of second-person relation that more usually sustain one’s projects and imbue one’s world with meaningful possibilities.

However, it should be added that some grief experiences similarly lack the dynamism de Ascribed earlier; the predicament can seem static, permanent. There is a global sense of disconnection from other people and even from activities that dissociative identity disorder not depend upon the (p. 548) deceased in any obvious way. But although such experiences—sometimes labeled as “complicated grief”—seem to involve a loss of possibility akin to that of depression, they are importantly different in structure. The stasis of depression involves feeling un able to relate to others, whereas the stasis of grief can be symptomatic of a resolute and unwavering second-person relationship with a specific individual, the deceased. There is an enduring interpersonal connection, of a kind that detaches the grieving person from the world of the living, from any sense of significant temporal change, from shared tem orality. As Riley (2012: 60, 21) writes, “in essence you have stopped. You’re held in a crystalline suspension.... I tried always to be there for him, solidly. And I shall continue 15 to be.” Nussbaum (2001: 82–83) offers this insightful remark: We might add that what distinguishes normal from pathological mourning is, above all, this change of tense: the pathological mourner continues to put the dead person at the very center of her own structure of goals and expectations, and this paralyzes life.

So, while the world of depression is static and bereft of meaningful pastimes partly be cause one experiences oneself as incapable of certain kinds of second-person relation, the world of so-called “complicated” grief (one kind of complicated grief, at least) is similarly static but has a very different underlying structure: stasis is attributable to one’s continua ing to relate to a specific individual in a certain way, rather than failing to relate to any 16 one in that way.

That said, there are other grief experiences that do involve a pervasive sense of being un able to relate to other people in general, of a kind that is close to or indistinguishable from interpersonal experience in depression. I am thinking, in particular, of “traumatic grief”. This is sometimes identified with “complicated grief,” but differs from what I have just described. A central theme is the pervasive loss of what 17 we might call “Effective trust” in things and, more specifically, in other people. A sense of security that was once presupposed as a backdrop to meaningful activities and to one’s relations with other people is disturbed. Nothing and nobody is encountered in quite the same way as before. (p. 549) One is vulnerable before people in general, in a way that in terferes with the abilities to enter into second-person relations that involve a sense of connectedness, to embark upon projects that depend on others for their sustenance, and to contemplate the possibility of a future that departs in positive ways from the present. With this basic sense of confidence, trust, or safety gone from the world, types of possibil ity are lost (including that of experiencing and relating to other people in certain ways), rather than just systems of possibility.

The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try So experiences of grief can differ markedly, depending on how one relates to others, to the living and the dead. And, in some cases, the difference between grief and depression is greater than in others. Nevertheless, an informative phenomenological distinction (ad mittedly one that involves substantial idealization and allows for borderline cases) can be made between losing specific individuals, along with associated systems of possibility, and losing types of possibility. This distinction may not track current diagnostic practice but, if that is the case, phenomenological research can contribute to a case for revision.

Interpersonal Relations and Self-regulation I have focused principally on experiential differences between grief and depression. How ever, I also think there are lessons to be learned from studying the phenomenology of grief that apply equally to depression and various other psychiatric illness categories. Re Electing upon the structure of grief serves to make salient the extent to which the regular son of our experiences, thoughts, and activities depends upon specific individuals and other people in general. Profound grief inevitably involves some degree of detachment from mundane, everyday, norm-governed interactions with other people. But projects and pastimes prove resilient to the extent that continuing relations with others hold them in place and assist one in negotiating changes. In addition, the narratives that we construct around our experiences are influenced by interactions with others, and often co-con strutted. It follows that the course of a grieving process depends, to a significant extent, 18 on how the bereaved person relates to others and on how they relate to her. Studying the phenomenology of grief thus serves to illustrate the—often insufficiently acknowl edged—extent to which the experienced world, our sense of rootedness within it, and our ability to act in meaningful ways all depend upon other people. A fully developed account of the various ways (p. 550) in which experience, thought, and activity are interpersonally regulated may prove equally illuminating when seeking to better understand all those cases of psychiatric illness where social isolation and estrangement from others are prominent themes. I am increasingly of the view that J. H. van den Berg (1972: 105) was right in remarking that “loneliness is the nucleus of psychiatry.”

Acknowledgments Thanks to Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, and Giovanni Stanghellini for helpful com Bents on an earlier version. PAGE_BREAK 1 ( ) See e.g. the website of the Coalition for DSM-5 Reform: (last accessed May 15, 2015). It includes details of an “Open letter to the DSM 5 Task Force.” The letter addresses several concerns, including that of lowering diagnostic thresholds by removing the grief exclusion clause. An accompanying petition was signed by 15,339 peo ple.

2 ( ) See also Lamb, Pies, and Zisook (2010 ), who propose eliminating the bereavement ex clusion clause but also extending DSM-fourth’s two-week duration requirement for major de precision.

3 ( ) A closely related debate, which raises similar issues, concerns whether or not comply acted grief should be recognized as a distinct psychiatric disorder. See e.g. Lichtenthal, Cress, and Prigerson; Zisook and Shear.

4 ( ) Loss vs. retention of self-esteem is also the principal difference emphasized by Freud in his famous essay “Mourning and Melancholia” (1917/2005 ).

5 ( ) In order of appearance, they are: “likely to”; “tend to”; “may be”; “generally”; “goner ally”; “common”; “typically”; “generally.”

6 ( ) All of these themes are present in autobiographical accounts of grief, such as those cit ed in this article. They also feature prominently in first-person accounts of depression.

7 ( ) These same differences, along with several others, are mentioned by Lamb, Pies, and Zisook (2010: 23). In grief, they note, a sense of connectedness to others remains, as does the sense that things will or at least could get better. And what I will say about perspex Dive-shifting can be related to their observation that grief comes in waves, while depress ion is ever-present. I elaborate on these themes in a way that complements their ap roach. But I further maintain that these three aspects of experience are to be under stood in terms of a single, unified phenomenological structure, in grief and in depression.

8 ( ) Of course, they can share various other symptoms as well, such a lethargy and bodily discomfort. However, for current purposes, I suggest that a selective emphasis on isola son, stasis, and loss of possibility is a fruitful one.

9 ( ) A detailed comparative analysis will also need to include a more discriminating ac count of the kinds of experience encompassed by “major depression”. In addition, grief will need to be considered in relation to various other psychiatric ate Dories, such as post-traumatic stress disorder. Individual and cultural differences in the The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try expression, experience, and interpretation of grief (including religious interpretation) will also need to be addressed at length.

10 ( ) This is sometimes described in terms of lost “assumptions.” Something that one habit ally presupposed, took for granted, and came to depend upon is lost: “When somebody dies a whole set of assumptions about the world that relied upon the other person for their validity are suddenly invalidated” ( Parches 1998: 90).

11 ( ) This corresponds to what Lear (2006 ) calls “radical hope.” See Radcliffe (2015: chap ter 4) for a discussion of radical hope in grief, and its absence in depression.

12 ( ) These testimonies were obtained via a questionnaire study, conducted as part of the 2009–12 AHRCand DFG-funded project “Emotional Experience in Depression: A Phil sophical Study.” For a detailed discussion of the questionnaire, see Radcliffe (2015: chap ter 1).

13 ( ) Hence grief and depression can also involve different alterations in the structure of temporal experience. I have argued elsewhere that temporal experience in depression, like depression itself, is highly variable. Nevertheless, there is a difference between in habiting a world where the future offers no prospect of significant change (or no prospect of positive change, at least) and feeling “lost,” insofar as the future is no longer expert Inced in the light of a specific system of projects. This difference, amongst others, serves to distinguish temporal experience in many (but not all) cases of grief from experiences of time that are more typical of depression (Radcliffe 2015: chapter 7). For further discus ion of temporal experience in depression, see also Fuchs (2013 ). For a wider-ranging dis cession of the varieties of temporal experience in psychiatric illness, see e.g. Minkowski.

14 ( ) These testimonies were obtained via a questionnaire study. See n. 7 for details.

15 ( ) See also Radcliffe (2016 ) for a more detailed discussion of Riley’s account.

16 ( ) One might wonder whether and to what extent the kinds of experience I have de Ascribed are specific to personal grief. Perhaps the break-up of a relationship, the loss of a job, one’s children growing up and leaving home, or moving to an unfamiliar country can all similarly involve losing systems of possibility, oscillating between conflicting perspex Dives and yearning for interpersonal relationships that are no longer available. Although there are considerable similarities between bereavement experiences and experiences as sociated with other kinds of loss, I think there is something distinctive about grieving over the death of another person. One is confronted with the prospect of irrevocable loss and absence. The experienced interplay between presence and absence, and the way in which one continues to relate to someone who has died, thus have a distinctive character. However, I am willing to concede that there are at least some cases where a person grieves in this way over the death of a non-human animal.

The Phenomenological Clarification of Grief and its Relevance for Psychic try 17 ( ) More generally, I want to maintain that the kinds of phenomenological change I have described in both grief and depression are essentially, although not exclusively, “affect Dive” in character. Feelings, I argue, are not generally experiences of the body in isolation from the environment; they also shape how we experience and relate to our surroundings and to other people. At least some instances of grief involve alterations in what I have elsewhere called “existential feeling,” a felt sense of reality and belonging that is prenup posed by all intentional states with specific or even very general contents. I construe shifts in existential feeling in terms of changes in the kinds of possibility that one is open to. Hence it might seem that typical grief does not involve a change in existential feeling, while depression and some forms of complicated or traumatic grief do. However, I would not want to insist that typical grief is bereft of “existential changes.” In fact, I think that certain aspects of the experience, such as a pervasive loss of confi Fence or sense of helplessness are plausibly interpreted in that way. Rather, my claim here is that typical grief does not involve an existential change of the same kind as that found in depression. If it is accepted that grief sometimes or always involves changes in existential feeling, the dual nature of grief—its specificity and generality—complicates my account of these feelings by problematizing my contrast between specifically directed in tentional states and non-specific, pre-intentional existential feelings; it might turn out that a singular experience can be both. An interesting question to address is whether this duality is specific to the interpersonal realm, whether only a person can be both an entity in one’s world and a condition for one’s world.

18 ( ) See Sbarra and Kazan for a recent discussion of how emotional experience is interpersonally regulated in grief.

Matthew Radcliffe Matthew Radcliffe Matthew Radcliffe Department of Philosophy, University of Vienna, Austria Gender Dysphoria # Gender Dysphoria Giovanni Castellini and Milena Mancini The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: May 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Gender dysphoria (GD) is defined as the distress that may accompany the incongruence between one’s experienced or expressed gender and one’s assigned gender. Gender mem bership refers to an individual’s sense of self as male or female, and it is a fundamental component of our general identity, providing a sense of biographical continuity. The GD condition highlights the dichotomy and the contradictions of the post-modern society be tween anatomical body and gender identity. The psycho-social perspective maintains that the sex category assigned at birth is simply a first guess as to what identity we will later assume. Indeed, male and female are not seen as the only possible gender identities, and they need not to be regarded as mutually exclusive. This interpretation suggests that gen der identity may be a more important marker of personhood and self-identity than anatomical sexual identity.

Keywords: gender dysphoria, gender role, gender identity, sexual orientation, identity, body AROUND the question of gender dysphoria, there are still many unclear aspects, and lim ted information. For example, for many people, the terms “gender” and “sex” are used interchangeably, and thus incorrectly. In recent years, there has been a great deal of at Mention on the gender question, and from a psychopathological and nosographic point of view, many steps forward have been taken, but there is still much to do.

Gender is a social combination of identity, expression, and social elements related to mas culinity and femininity. It includes gender identity (self-identification), gender expression (self-expression), social gender (social expectations), gender roles (socialized actions), and gender attribution (social perception). This concept is strictly related to the term of gender identity. It is an individual’s internal sense of being male, female, both, neither, or something else. In other words, gender identity is the subjective experience of member ship to a gender. This subjective sense of belonging to a given gender is generally taken for granted by most of the persons.

Gender Dysphoria Gender identity is part of our general identity, and provides a sense of continuity of the self. Interrogatives on this aspect of our life are barely present in our consciousness—at least in ordinary circumstances. Exceptions are represented by stages of development such as adolescence, or by some categories of persons who do not identify themselves with the dichotomous categories male/female. The debate on gender identity has recently broken into the consciousness for psychopathology, increasing interrogation from differ ent perspectives, including medicine, psychology, anthropology, and ethics. In very goner al terms, is the philosophical issue of gender identity is: 1) the existence of only two dia metrically opposed genders or either–or categories—male and female merely defined in terms of anatomical characteristics; 2) if the differences between men and women follow these binary, dichotomous and stable categories.

In the present chapter, we will resume the historical trajectory of gender definition, em phasizing the importance for psychopathology of a different perspective on gender than the common definition provided by Western culture. We will first offer a brief description of the concepts of gender identity, sexual orientation, gender role, and gender dysphoria. Our approach is coherent with the dimensional view proposed by the DSM board, as well as by LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgen der, queer, and/or questioning individuals) movements. This position considers gender dysphoria and (p. 553) transsexualism as positions on a gender variants continuum. We as Fume gender heterogeneity and aim to understand how persons who are dysphoric about their gender experience themselves (their body) and the way they are looked at by other persons, and finally how these affect their own sense of identity. Every psychological, medical, or surgical treatment should come as consequences of this understanding of “what is it like” to suffer from gender dysphoria. This is an opposite view with regard to the rigid anatomical perspective, which reduces transgender to individuals who are in the wrong body and must “rectify” this error with hormonal treatment or surgical intervene son.

Gender Dysphoria Versus Disorder of Gender Since 2013, the board for DSM-5 decided that gender identity disorder no longer exists. The dichotomous perspective that identified a stigmatizing threshold between normalcy and pathology was replaced by a dimensional characterization of the distress that may accompany the incongruence between one’s ex perienced or expressed gender and one’s assigned gender. Indeed, there are individuals who have an uncertain or confused gender identity, or are transitioning from one gender to the other, who do not fit into this dichotomous scheme. The extreme of this continuum is represented by gender dysphoria, defined as the distress that may accompany the in congruence between one’s experienced or expressed gender and one’s assigned gender. For gender dysphoric persons, the primary source of suffering is the sense of dissonance with the gender assigned to one’s anatomy cal sexual characteristics.

Gender Dysphoria Conversely, gender dysphoric persons are characterized by a strong and persistent identi fixation with the opposite sex, discomfort with their own sex, and a sense of inappropri Lateness in the gender role of that sex. GD sub Sects experience a cognitive state in which their physical body contrasts with their selfperceived identity, and which can be a source of deep and chronic suffer ing. Transgender persons perceive their gender identity as incongruous with their body, and therefore experience the desire to develop a gender role consistent with their gender identity.

The gender dysphoria condition highlights the dichotomy and the contradictions of the postmodern society between a physical reality (anatomical body) and the mental reality (gender identity). Therefore, a main issue in this area is what makes us male or female. For those persons who are not clearly classified as he or she, the Western world has coined the word “transgender.” Indeed, the natal anatomic view of gender has been the mainstream view in most developed countries. According to this perspective the determinant of our sex identity is based on our external anatomy, and persons should grow up with a gender role that matches their anatomy, and those who deviate from these “rules” are seen as mentally disordered.

Clinicians should be aware that gender-atypical does not always underlay a pathological condition, rather it refers to somatic features or behaviors that are not typical (in a stasis tidal sense) of individuals with the same assigned gender in a given society and historical era. (p. 554) For behavior, gender-nonconforming is an alternative descriptive term. As for all the other clinical conditions included in the DSM, mental health professionals should consider taking care of persons with gender atypical features only when they identify an individual’s Effective/cognitive discontent with the assigned gender, the so-called dyspho ria.

The identification with a pole of the gender dimension or alternatively the hetoregeneity of self-gender perception vary according with different cultures and countries. For exam ple, gender fluidity was reported by 4.6% of males and 3.2% of females in Netherlands and by 35% of persons in Israel. Within trans gender persons, 25% defined themselves as non-binary gender.

The Descriptive Level: Definition of Gender # Identity, Gender Role, and Sexual Orientation In light of the above considerations, it is necessary to provide a definition of a) gender identity, b) gender role, and c) sexual orientation.

Gender Dysphoria Gender Identity: How Do We Develop the Sense of Gender Member ship?

Gender membership is a fundamental component of our general identity. It is part of the so-called “sexual identity,” which is a mosaic concept, including not just gender identity, but also biologic gender, sexual orientation, as well as gender role. The term “gender” originally related to one’s belonging to a specific category of persons. The Latin word gens referred to Roman families, which were large groups of persons related to each oth er sharing the same name (e.g. gens Julia to which Julius Caesar belonged). Now “gen der” refers to the subjective belonging to the categories of male, female, or an alternative gender. This concept was first introduced in the psychosexual development model pro posed by Masica et al. (1971 ), who first described persons with discrepancies between bi logical sex and gender identity.

Biological or chromosomal sex is actually binary (i.e. the presence of a Y or tenth chrome some). However, what is between this first step of psychosexual development and the adult sexual identity is much more complex than a binary divide. The chromosomal sex in fluences the determination of the gonadal sex, in differentiating the bipotential gonadal ridge into either testes or an ovary. Across the gestational period, under the effect of different hormones, external genitalia become defined and visible. Masculine ization induced by testosterone determines closure of the urethral folds and development of the prostate and scrotum, while in women the “road” of feminization is toward development of the uterus, Fallopian tubes, and the distal portion of the vagina. Then the feminine genital tubercle develops as a clitoris, the urethral folds form the labia minor (p. 555) and the labioscrotal swellings give rise to the labia major. From this time the morphology of external genitalia al low our family to establish our masculine/feminine name and the so-called “assigned gen der.” It is clear how this anatomic idea of gender has been conceptualized in a binary, di chotomous manner with a male gender identity at one pole and a female gender identity at the other pole.

For most people the sense of being male or female is congruent with anatomical/morph logical sex. Also, it is commonly assumed that gender is univocally and linearly dependent on chromosomes tenth or Y. However, there are several conditions, such as disorders of sex development (DSD), which challenge the relationship between chromosomal gender and gender identity. For example, persons reporting 5alpha-reductase-2 deficiency spend their life until late adolescence trusting in their feminine identity, while they have masc line (XY) chromosome. Modern medicine attempted to find valid ways of managing gender identity and further intervention on DSD, without a common consensus.

This kind of observation demonstrates the lack of a univocal correspondence between bio logical gender and gender identity. Moreover, according to Money and his colleagues (1955, 1968 ) and the first postulation of his psychosexual model, gender identity is not in ate, rather it is dynamic process which results from the continuous integration between Gender Dysphoria biological changes, cultural influences, and experiential steps through life. Indeed, there are individuals who have an uncertain or confused gender identity or who are transition ing from one gender to the other, without fitting into a dichotomous scheme.

The age for gender identity (i.e. an individual’s personal sense of self as male or female) development is still matter of debate. Freud assumed that gender identity becomes stable with the resolution of the Oedipus complex, and a child acquires a stable gender identity when he identifies himself with the same sex parent. However, nowadays scientists tend to put the onset of gender identity at a more precocious age. Gender identity usually de velops by age three, remaining stable over a person’s lifetime.

How We Act Our Gender: The Gender Role The term “gender role” describes the behaviors, attitudes, and personality traits that a society, in a given culture and historical period, designates as masculine or feminine, that is, more “appropriate” for, or typical of, the male or female social role. Gender role represents the public manifestation of our gender identity, and the way our gender identity is defined through the gaze of the others.

The concept of gender role can be interpreted in the light of the construct of social identi ty or more exactly “social role,” which includes participant roles, positions, relationships, reputations, and other dimensions of social personae, which are conventionally linked to epistemic and Effective stances. Social role related to identity is multiple and varied, describing individual representations that embody particular social histories built up through, and continually recreated in, one’s everyday experiences. Moreover, it is acknowledged that individuals belong to varied groups and so take on a variety of identities as defined by their membership of these groups. In our use of language, we represent a particular identity at the same time that we construct it. One of the more prominent positions on social identity is Anthony Middens’s (p. 556) theory of structuration. According to Middens, individual agency is a semiotic activity, a so Dial construction, “something that has to be routinely created and sustained in the reflex ive activities of the individual.” In our locally occasioned social actions, we, as individual agents, shape and at the same time are given shape by what Middens refers to as social structures. In our actions, we draw on these structures and in so doing recreate them and ourselves as social actors. The repeated use of social structures in recurring social pram ices in turn leads to the development of larger social systems, “patterns of relations in groupings of all kinds, from small, intimate groups, to social networks, to large organza sons”.

Indeed, gender role is a social construct which depends on the historical period and cul Aural influences, which define what is commonly accepted as being appropriate for mas culine or feminine identity. Across history, the heterogeneity of gender role expressions showed the need for self-definition of gender variant persons who attempted to present themselves as non-dichotomically defined. Transgender people are finding cre Dative and constructive ways out of their situation, expanding the possibilities for language Gender Dysphoria and identities, and overcoming the limitation of sociocultural traditional models. Transgender persons attempted to reconstruct the world around them by the pow er of a new language; a language relating to bodies, ways of dressing, and also words. For example, different terms have been adopted for the necessity of non-gender definition such as androgynous, mixed gender, pangender. Gender fluidity has been expressed as bigender, gender fluid, pangender, while absence of gender has been defined as A-gender, gender neutral, non-gendered (see Table 59.1). The transgender world is characterized by continuous linguistic innovation, as an act to challenge a world that has not provided membership categories for them. Many words have been in vented and adopted by transgender persons to define themselves, including gendertrash, spokensherm, and genderqueer. Words such as femisexuals, mascusexuals, transhomosexuals have also been coined, demonstrating great creativity in the language of transgender persons. These examples suggest an attempt among trans gender people to transcend grammatical gender and reconfigure language to express their subjectivities and desires.

One of the contributions that work on transgenderism can offer to sociolinguistics and an thropology is a focus on the relationship between language and the lived body. Transgen deism contributes to an affirmation of the permeability of gender boundaries. Several studies have been undertaken regarding the language of transgender persons and the adoption of stereotypical speech, that is, a way of speaking that helps to promote the ap pearance of appropriately sexed corporeality. For example, it has been noted that trans gender females generally use more tag questions (i.e. questions appended at the end of statements, like “this is silly, isn’t it?”) and the so-called “empty adjectives” like lovely and precious. On the other hand, transgender males are told to use a cer Cain aggressive style and to tell people what they want instead of asking it, to help them pass as men. Sociolinguistic theories focused on the relationship between the process of identity construction and lan gauge. Their research is concerned with the ways in which individuals use language to co-construct their everyday worlds and, in particular, their own social roles and identities and those of others. (p. 557) and identities, and overcoming the limitation of sociocultural traditional models. Transgender persons attempted to reconstruct the world around them by the pow er of a new language; a language relating to bodies, ways of dressing, and also words. For example, different terms have been adopted for the necessity of non-gender definition such as androgynous, mixed gender, pangender. Gender fluidity has been expressed as bigender, gender fluid, pangender, while absence of gender has been defined as A-gender, gender neutral, non-gendered (see Table 59.1). The transgender world is characterized by continuous linguistic innovation, as an act to challenge a world that has not provided membership categories for them. Many words have been in vented and adopted by transgender persons to define themselves, including gendertrash, spokensherm, and genderqueer. Words such as femisexuals, mascusexuals, transhomosexuals have also been coined, demonstrating great creativity in the language of transgender persons. These examples suggest an attempt among trans gender people to transcend grammatical gender and reconfigure language to express their subjectivities and desires.

One of the contributions that work on transgenderism can offer to sociolinguistics and an thropology is a focus on the relationship between language and the lived body. Transgen deism contributes to an affirmation of the permeability of gender boundaries. Several studies have been undertaken regarding the language of transgender persons and the adoption of stereotypical speech, that is, a way of speaking that helps to promote the ap pearance of appropriately sexed corporeality. For example, it has been noted that trans gender females generally use more tag questions (i.e. questions appended at the end of statements, like “this is silly, isn’t it?”) and the so-called “empty adjectives” like lovely and precious. On the other hand, transgender males are told to use a cer Cain aggressive style and to tell people what they want instead of asking it, to help them pass as men. Sociolinguistic theories focused on the relationship between the process of identity construction and lan gauge. Their research is concerned with the ways in which individuals use language to co-construct their everyday worlds and, in particular, their own social roles and identities and those of others. (p. 557)

Gender Dysphoria Table 59. Glossary of terms relating to gender # REDEFINING GENDER Gender Person not identifying with any gender and they can (also none categorized as man or woman or neither. Charac gender) terized by the feeling of having no specific gender.

Androgy A person who may appear with masculine and Semi nous nine traits or as neither male nor female, or as in be tween male and female. It is a non-traditional gender expression.

Bigender A person who identifies with both genders and/or who has a tendency to move between masculine and Semi nine gender-typed behavior depending on context.

Bisexual A person attracted to males/men and females/women.

This attraction may be on an emotional, physical, or sexual level, and it may be not equally split between genders, and there may be a preference for one gen der over others.

Cisgender A person whose gender identity matches the biology cal sex they were assigned at birth. It is based on the physical sex.

FTM or Term used to identify a person who was designated a FM (Fe female sex at birth and currently identifies as male, male-Boor identifies predominantly as masculine. They often Male) live as a man. This includes a heterogeneous range of experiences, such as: self-identification as men or male, self-identification as transsexual, transgen der men, transmen, female men, new men, or FTM. In many cases, these persons reject all definition and some people prefer the term MTM (male-to-male) to underscore the fact that although they were assigned female at birth, they never had a female gender den sty.

Gender Dysphoria Gender bi The idea that there are only two diametrically op nary posed genders or either-or categories—male and fe male, based on sex assigned at birth. It is a cultural belief that does not consider the membership of a gender as a continuum or spectrum of gender identi ties and expressions. This idea is limiting for those who do not fit neatly into the either-or categories.

Gender Gender expression is consistent with cultural norms.

conform Therefore, man is masculine and woman is feminine.

ing

Genderflu A gender identity where a person shifts between man/ id masculine and woman/feminine, or falls somewhere along this spectrum. A person may identify with 1) neither or both female and male; 2) experiences a range of femaleness and maleness, with a flow be tween genders; 3) consistently experiences his/her gender identity outside of the gender binary.

Gender Gender expression is inconsistent with cultural norms noncom expected for that gender. Specifically, boys or men forming are not “masculine enough” or are feminine, while girls or women are not “feminine enough” or are mas culine. Gender nonconforming is often inaccurately confused with sexual orientation. For example, not all transgender people are gender nonconforming, and cisgender people may also be gender nonconforming.

This term may be used in tandem with other identity.

Gen An umbrella term for people whose gender identity is derqueer not included within the binary of female and male, is between or beyond genders, or is some combination of genders.

Intersex Term to describe someone with a disorder of sexual development, one who is born with sex chromosomes, external genitalia, and/or an internal reproductive system that is not considered “standard” or Korma Dive for either the male or female sex. This term is fre quently confused with transgender, but the two are completely distinct.

Gender Dysphoria Intergen A person whose gender identity is between genders der or a combination of genders.

LGBTQ Acronym used to refer lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans gender, queer, or/and questioning individuals. Often seen as LGBT or LGBTQ.

MTF or Term used to identify a person who was designated a MF male sex at birth and currently identifies as female, (Male-olives as a woman, or identifies as feminine. This in Female) Eludes a broad range of experiences: men who identify as women or female; as transsexual, transgender women, transwomen, male women, new women, or as MTF. In many cases, these persons pre fer the term FTF (female-to-female) to underscore the fact that though they were assigned male at birth, they never had a masculine gender identity.

Non-Dina Describes a spectrum of gender identities and expires ry (gen ion that is outside of or beyond two traditional con der) cents of male or female. Term include “gender,” “bi gender,” “gender-queer,” “gender fluid,” and “pan gender.”

Pangender This term concerns a non-binary gender defined as in Eluding all genders and not being exclusively man or woman. It refers to a person whose gender identity is comprised of many gender identities and/or expires ions.

Transgen An umbrella term describing a person whose gender der (TG) identity does not match the biological sex assigned to birth. It refers to anyone who transcends the coven tonal definitions of man and woman and whose selfidentification or expression challenges traditional no sons of male and female. This term includes two ate Dories: transgender man (or Transman)—a woman who identifies as a man (see also FTM); transgen der woman (or Transwoman)—a man who identifies as a woman (see also MTF).

Gender Dysphoria Transsexu A person whose gender identity is different from their al designated sex at birth and who has had hormonal or surgical interventions to change their body to be more aligned with their gender identity.

(*) Sources: – JAC Stringer of The Trans and Queer Wellness Initiative JAC (at): – Teaching Transgender Toolkit, by Eli R. Green and Lula Maturer: (p. 558)

(p. 559) What I Like: The Sexual Orientation In clinical practice with gender dysphoria, we often have to deal with the general public’s ignorance regarding gender identity/dysphoria. It is quite common, for example, for peo ple to confuse gender dysphoria with homosexuality. Even though these two concepts are mutually correlated, gender identity and sexual orientation do not represent the same construct. Sexual orientation refers to the sex of the person to whom an individual is rot ically attracted. It comprises several components, including sexual fantasy, patterns of physiological arousal, sexual behavior, sexual identity, and social role. Scientific studies demonstrating the healthy, adaptive functioning of the great majority of gay and lesbian adults paved the way toward removal of homosexuality as an illness from the DSM in 1973. Therefore, homosexuality is now recognized as a non-pathological variant of human sexuality.

A relevant issue is represented by the so-called cross-gender behaviors among children and young adolescents. The diagnosis of gender dysphoria in children is controversial. Several different categories of gender discordance, each charac terized by a unique developmental trajectory, have been described. They differ in regard to whether gender discordance emerges in child hood, adolescence, or adulthood; whether the gender discordance is persistent or ran saint; and whether there is a post-transition homosexual or heterosexual orientation. In follow-up studies of pre-pubertal boys with gender discordance—including many who are not being treated for mental health issues—the cross-gender tendencies usually fade over time and do not persist into adulthood, with only 2.2% to 11.9% continuing to experience gender discordance. Rather, 75% become ho mosexual or bisexual in fantasy and 80% in behavior by age nineteen; some gender-Kari ant behavior may persist. The Resistance of gender discordance may reflect the resolution of a “cognitive confusion factor,” with increasing flexibility as children mature in Gender Dysphoria thinking about gender identity and realize that one can be a boy or girl despite variation from conventional gender roles and norms.

While sexual orientation is no longer considered a matter for medical or psychological in terventions, it is true that non-heterosexual persons or other sexual minorities often re port psychopathological disturbances related to their condition. One of the possible expla sons for this could be the relationship with stigma and discrimination. Homophobia was originally defined by Weinberg (1973 ) as “the dread of being in close quarters with homo sexual,” and many theorists have emphasized that homo phobia has to do with the personal discomfort and fear that heterosexuals may expert Once when associating with gay men and lesbians.

Different Perspectives on Gender Variants Gender variants are not a novelty of modern society. In the art of the Renaissance there would be a sort of hesitation before the difference between the categories of male and fe male. In Renaissance painting, there was an indeterminacy of sexual identity, for exam ple, Leonardo’s effeminate men and Michelangelo’s virile women. The his Cory of (p. 560) art reports a plethora of gender fluidness or uncertainty, such as the her maphrodite statues in the Hellenistic period, Rivera paintings of the seventeenth century, or the Sultan Heine of the painter Vain. In contemporary art this hesitation, the ability to swing your identity, seem to reappear with force reaching the extreme limit of the iconog raphy transgender. The photographer Nan Golden shows in his photos the impossibility of precise identification of the nude in sexuality. From the naked to the represented object there is always the start of sexual identity movement, an endless shift of identity. In the phase of the passage from the naked to the represented object, the nude is shaped like the endless transit of sexual identity.

Contrary to the anatomical position, the psychosocial perspective maintains that the sex category into which we are placed at birth is simply a first guess as to what identity we will later assume, and that it is possible to grow up with a gender that does not match that original sex category. Therefore, “transgender” should be considered as an aspect of human diversity rather being considered a disorder, deviance, or at worst depravity. The conflict between these two perspectives is a serious matter of concern for transgender persons, involving the discrepancy between identity and the name written in a passport, social welfare rights, marrying and parenting rights, even the search for a job.

The anthropological perspective allows us to consider the ways in which culture shapes and is itself shaped by the activities and understandings of people, from the most inch mate of bodily concerns to the most global of economic systems. Indeed, there are differ ent ways in which sexuality and gender are understood in other cultures and, in so doing, can underscore the importance of disengaging concepts of sex from those of gender. This area highlights the importance of the social context in shaping our un derstanding of gender as something that is not given, but rather learned. In many parts of the world male and female are not seen as the only possible gender identities, and they Gender Dysphoria need not to be regarded as mutually exclusive. Indeed, some peoples recognize the poss Ability of a third gender, and in Western societies, until the late eighteenth century, pop lar and medical science assumed that there was only one gender. This interpretation sug Bests that gender identity may be a more important marker of personhood and self-identi ty than anatomical sexual identity. However, when it comes to how to respond to individu als whose gender role and identity is manifestly at odds with their physical body and ap pearance, most groups or societies are at a loss. So fundamental is the need for clarity about who is male and who is female that those who demonstrate apparent uncertainty (or indeed express a perplexing certainty) are viewed with alarm.

There is no universal patterning of tasks or behaviors according to sex. For example, in some societies men may adopt more nurturing kinds of behavior than women, while women adopt more aggressive roles. An interesting example is represented by Hijras in India, a religious community of men who dress and act like women and for whom commitment to the role of hijra is signified through their impotence as men, an im potency usually achieved through the act of castration. As children they often have inter est in playing with girls, with wearing female rather than male clothing and using eye make-up. Gilbert Herd notes that central to hijra identity is their in-betweenness, their being neither man or woman is what being hijra is. The idea that a person’s identity arises out of his/her sense of who he/she is and how he/she presents to the world is more widespread in those countries that are least influenced by Judo-Christian or Western psychiatry. Among them is Thailand, which is overwhelmingly Buddhist.

There is no universal patterning of tasks or behaviors according to sex. For example, in some societies men may adopt more nurturing kinds of behavior than women, while women adopt more aggressive roles. An interesting example is represented by Hijras in India, a religious community of men who dress and act like women and for whom commitment to the role of hijra is signified through their impotence as men, an im potency usually achieved through the act of castration. As children they often have inter est in playing with girls, with wearing female rather than male clothing and using eye make-up. Gilbert Herd notes that central to hijra identity is their in-betweenness, their being neither man or woman is what being hijra is. The idea that a person’s identity arises out of his/her sense of who he/she is and how he/she presents to the world is more widespread in those countries that are least influenced by Judo-Christian or Western psychiatry. Among them is Thailand, which is overwhelmingly Buddhist.

(p. 561) Languages reflect how the issue of gender identity is differently managed across cultures. For example, the Thai language fails to distinguish between sex and gender. One word, Whet, says it at all. The word is so versatile it can even be used for “sexuality.” Moreover, Thai culture allows for the possibility that there may be more than two sexes and genders; thus, for example, the common term for transgender is Whet tee sam, the third gender. On the contrary, the linguistic consequences of the anatomic view are evident in the English-speaking world. For example, male-to-female persons are generally called transsexual males or male transgenders, regardless of their perceived fe male identity. Indeed, many male-to-female persons refer to themselves as transgender females not males. A first consequence of this linguistic discrepancy is marriage: even though male-to-female persons are often attracted to males they may not be able to mar ry them, since in a number of Western countries this qualifies as a same-sex marriage and is illegal. Moreover, transgender persons may find it difficult to get a job simply because their gender identity and appearance fail to match their official documents. In Italy, the anatomic perspective is so strong that to get a new “legal” gender identity, persons must undergo a genital reassignment surgery intervention. In other words, they must sterilize themselves to adopt an (official) gender identity that resembles their perceived identity. Also, transgender persons can be victims of the anatomical perspective, as many of them say that they were “born transgender” but now they are male or female.

Gender Dysphoria The conflict between the two views (natal anatomical versus psychosocial) is nowhere more evident than it is in the names given to the surgical operations in which a person’s genital are removed. In English, the mainstream name is “sex reassign Bent surgery.” The connotation is one of moving away from the sex to which one properly belongs. In contrast, many transgenders talk about “sex confirmation surgery,” the condo Cation being moving toward the sex they always should have been.

The anatomic view is so represented in Western culture that the less-informed public finds it difficult to distinguish between gay and transgender persons. Considering sexual orientation, the anatomic view allows the statement that male-to-female persons should be considered as homosexuals. However a male-to-female person who is attracted to men generally feels female, and may have felt like this as long as she can remember, often predating any feelings of sexual attraction. Conscious that her attraction toward men is con sistent with her feelings of identity, she sees herself as heterosexual. She probably sees her partner’s attraction to her in the same light, as indeed he might.

Clinical Examples Two Different Life Trajectories: From Francisco to Luisa and from Marco to Camilla Luisa, born Francisco, perceives her objective body as an impediment for her life realize son. This was true the day she asks for help at the Gender Clinic but also continued after medical and surgical treatments. Our impression was that these difficulties were due to her long (p. 562) experience of discrimination and perceived extraneousness to the world. The first day of acceptance to the clinic she stated: I cannot stand my body anymore, it is between me and my life... I spent 23 years waiting for this moment. Now I want hormones and surgery as soon as possible.

My dream is to wake up one day, and to be a woman.

Luisa gave up her job, because she believed that a person can only exist in the eyes of others, as totally a man or a woman. She dissociative identity disorder not want to appear a clown; she desired to erase all traces of masculinity from her body. Luisa experienced her first cross-gender be Saviors when she was five years old. She sometimes wore feminine clothes, and reported marked cross-gender identification in role-playing, as she always acted as a mother or a bride. Her father was clearly against her “abnormal” feminine behaviors, and often swig matized them. Luisa told the clinicians: Luckily my puberty started late. Because this period was a living hell. I had my first relationship with a gay person. I could not bear him to look at or touch my genitals. At age 12, my body began to change... first hairs, the testicles became enlarged and I had my first erection.

Gender Dysphoria During adolescence, Luisa realized for the first time that she had been born in the wrong body. Luisa hated her body in such a way that she reported several dysfunctional diet at tempts, throughout her life: Women have a lean and slim body and mine is always so cumbersome. I do not go looking for a job because they do not want to look me like a freak. I do not want to be seen as a Cranny. I want to be Luisa. You always have to justify your existence, how do you put in a CV a name that has nothing to do with your appearance. I waited 20 years without a boyfriend, I lost many years which are important to study or to build a profession. Hormone therapy has led to the reduction of body hair, loss of spontaneous erections, breast growth. I’m not happy, you can still see the signs of my male body... broad shoulders, a beard that despite the laser treatment does not go away. I cannot go around like that. I must continue to ban age the penis and cover it. While in elementary school I was in a secure environs Bent, in junior high and high school, things change. Teachers always invited me to wear “more appropriate attire.” I started to avoid the male companions... Violent games, the jokes, and stuff like that. Spending time alone with some companions.

The rest of the guys called me “faggot”, or a drag queen and consider me strange.

During this time my father began to verbally attack me... I got to the stage where I felt it was better if I’d never been born. At the same time I suffered the worst humiliation of my life. A group of classmates gathered around me after school and began to laugh at me, the way I walked, dressed... someone even kicked me. Friends and classmates dissociative identity disorder nothing. And since then I stopped going to school.

Camilla, born Marco, spent her adolescence living either as a man either as a woman. She accepted her life trajectory and she referred to a family environment of tolerance and protection against stigma. At the end of hormonal treatment she was completely satisfied. Sometimes she goes out dressed as a woman, especially at night. She works as a physio therapist in a neutral appearance. When she asked for help at the clinic in Florence she wished to change her documents, but not to undergo a genital reassignment. Camilla started dressing in women’s clothes. She usually played with her mother, who had fun with her and encouraged her to try and play cross-gender roles. Since early adolescence she always imagined herself as a girl or as a neutral individual, adopting either male or female names.

The first hair, the first erections dissociative identity disorder not cause me hardship but a feeling that something foreign to me was happening to my body. I do not consider myself gay.

Gays are those that go (p. 563) with people of their own sex. I do not consider my self belonging to the male gender, but perhaps not entirely to the female. My mother always told me I do not care if you like men or women, if you want to be a man or woman. I would like to change some things in my body, make it less mas culine... I do not know, however, if I want to go ahead. I’m so happy... I finally feel that something is changing inside of me. Even just the idea of not having more male hormones in the body makes me feel good. I removed his beard. The penis Gender Dysphoria does not particularly bother me since I no longer have erections. I got a job as a hairdresser. I want to make an identity change without surgery. When I walk around I feel that people do not look at me anymore like a man.

Conclusion: Gender Dysphoria as a Subjective # Condition of Non-Belonging These two life trajectories of gender variant persons may demonstrate that different nevi ronmental factors may influence the sense of non-belonging of gender dysphoric individu als. A Western anatomic perspective that hardly accepts heterogeneity, fluidity, and un certainty may increase the sense of non-membership of transgender persons.

Western psychiatry considers gender dysphoria to be a psychiatric disorder by pointing out that it is rare, and it represents abnormality. The only treatments that are typically considered in Western countries are hormone therapy or surgery. However, a large proportion of transgender persons want to live in their actual condition without un dergoing any medical or surgical intervention. While the recognition of gender dysphoria as a disorder may allow access to state insurance and medical services, as well as legal protection against discrimination, most transgender persons see them selves not as disordered but rather as part of human diversity. Gender dysphoric individu als often state that their minds are fine but that they were born in the wrong body, and their mental problems are the consequences of reactions from family, friends, and society.

Contrary to the anatomical position, the psychosocial perspective maintains that the sex category into which we are placed at birth is simply a first guess as to what identity we will later assume, and that it is possible to grow up with a gender that does not match that original sex category. Therefore, “transgender” should be considered as an aspect of human diversity rather being considered a disorder, deviance, or at worst depravity. The conflict between these two perspectives is a serious matter of concern for transgender persons, involving the discrepancy between identity and the name written in a passport, their social welfare rights, their rights to marry and become parents, even the search for a job. PAGE_BREAK James A.. “The Contribution of Social Anthropology to the Understanding of the Atypical Gender Identity in Childhood.” In D. Di Ceglie (ed.), A Stranger in My Body. Atop cal Gender Identity Development and Mental Health, pp. 81–83. London: H. Karnak Books Ltd.

Joel D., Tarrasch R., German Z., Mukamel M., and Ziv E.. “Queering Gender: Studying Gender Identity in “Normative” Individuals.” Psychology & Sexuality 5: 291– 321.

Cost A., Vizier B., Pepin J., and Perchellet J. P.. “Studies on Sex Differentiation in Mammals.” Recent Progress in Hormone Research 29: 1–41.

Kulick D.. “Transgender and Language. A Review of the Literature and Surges sons for the Future.” A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 5: 605–622.

Kuyper L. and Wijsen C.. “Gender identities and Gender Dysphoria in the Nether lands.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 43: 377–385.

(p. 565) Lawrence A. A. and Fucker K. J.. “Gender Identity Disorders.” In M. Hersey and D. C. Beidel (eating disorders.), Adult Psychopathology and Diagnosis, 6th edn, pp. 601– 635. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Masica D. N., Money J., and Ehrhardt A. A.. “Fetal Feminization and Female Gen der Identity in the Testicular Feminizing Syndrome of Androgen Insensitivity.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 1: 131–142.

Mead M.. Sex and Temperament: I: Three Primitive Societies. New York: Norton.

Meyer-Bahlburg H. F. L.. “From Mental Disorder to Iatrogenic Hypogonadism: Dilemmas in Conceptualizing Gender Identity Variants as Psychiatric Conditions.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 39: 461–476.

Pigeon C. J. and Wisniewski A. B.. “Human Sex Differentiation and Its Abnormal ties.” Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics & Gynecology 17: 1–18.

Money J., Sampson J. G., and Sampson J. L.. “Hermaphroditism: Recommend sons Concerning Assignment of Sex, Change of Sex and Psychologic Management.” Bul letin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital 97: 284–300.

Money J., Ehrhardt A. A., and Masica D. N.. “Fetal Feminization Induced By Andrew gen Insensitivity in the Testicular Feminizing Syndrome: Effect on Marriage and Mater nalism.” Best Practice & Research. Clinical Obstetrics & Gynecology 123: 105–114.

Otis E.. “Constructing Social Identity: A Language Socialization Perspective.” Re search on Language and Social Interaction 26: 287–306.

Gender Dysphoria Romjampa T.. “The Construction of Male Homosexuality in the Journal of the Psy chiatric Association in Thailand.” Paper presented in the Third International Conference of Asia Scholars, Singapore.

Steensma T. D. and Cohen-Kettenis P. T.. “Gender Transitioning Before Puberty?” Archives of Sexual Behavior 40: 649–650. doi:10.1007/s10508-011-9752-2 Weinberg G.. Society and the Healthy Homosexual. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Wilson P.. “Development and Mental Health: The Issue of Difference in Atypical Gender Identity Development.” In D. Di Ceglie (ed.), A Stranger in My Body. Atypical Gen der Identity Development and Mental Health, pp. 1–9. London: H. Karnak Books Ltd.

Winter S. J.. “Language and Identity in Transgender: Gender Wars and the Case of the Thai Kathoey.” Conference paper presented at the Hawaii Conference on Social Sciences, Waikiki.

Fucker K. J.. Book Review: A Guide to America’s Sex Laws. Archives of Sexual Be Savior 29: 300–301.

Fucker K. J., Bradley S. J., Sullivan C. B., Kuksis M., Birkenfeld-Adams A., and Mitchell J. N.. “A Gender Identity Interview for Children.” Journal of Personality Assessment 61: 443–456.

Fucker K. J. and Bradley S. J.. Gender Identity Disorder and Psychosexual Prob ems in Children and Adolescents. New York: Guilford Press.

Giovanni Castellini Psychiatric Unit, Department of Health Sciences, Florence University School of Jedi cine Milena Mancini Department of Psychological Sciences, Humanities, and Territory, University of Chi eti-Pescara Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Maria Luisa Figueira and Lu's Madeira The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jul 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter aims to describe the psychopathology of the phenomena of hysteria, dissoci Cation, conversion, and somatization across psychiatric nosologies. The extent of this field of research includes a vast range of experiences and mechanisms, and several phenom nological, epistemological, and ethical qualms have made this field difficult to compare Pensively synthesize every aspect of these phenomena. The reader finds here a review of major contributions from seminal inputs, historical waves of research which ultimately led to the current use of these words. It further considers clinical and theoretical pitfalls which damaged the use of these symbols and demoted research to other clinical areas of psychiatry. Also, and by addressing the contributions from phenomenological psy chopathology, it provides further clarification of their possible use in clinical practice and research—a necessary first step.

Keywords: hysteria, dissociation, conversion, somatization, descriptive psychopathology # Introduction DISSOCIATION, conversion, somatization, and hysteria are symbols deployed to describe an assorted range of phenomena and mechanisms that are conceptually and historically intertwined and which can be organized together. The puzzling situation of how little is still known about them is witnessed in their Anglo-Saxon depiction as “medically unex pained symptoms.” Their prognosis and treatment strategies also suggest they are two-edged diagnoses, at first deli Bated by the absence of other, organic, disorders causing the symptoms (e.g. limb parlay sis despite no evident acute vascular brain disorder or depersonalization without features of a major depressive disorder). The second edge is the fact that they reflect anxiety as a foundation feature leading to most pharmacotherapies being ineffective and that the patient might suffer from an underlying personal ty disorder which only responds to long-term psychotherapy. Indeed, these diagnoses in Solve stigma and discrimination on the part of mental health providers who find such pa Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization taints annoying and frustrating (or, at least, dissatisfying).

It would be an arduous (or perhaps impossible) task to compile and depict in a short chapter all the phenomena entailed in hysteria (including the features of a “hysterical” personality), the assorted manifestations linked with conversion and dissociation, and the neurological and physical symptoms (and signs) which have not yet been medically ex pained. The reader will therefore find herein, an up-to-date discussion on the range of symptoms and their organization in these fields, concepts, and current disagreements, in Eluding descriptions of experiences given as examples. For the purpose of understanding the matter more clearly, the chapter is divided in three sections: hysteria, dissocia son, and conversion and somatization.

(p. 567) Hysteria Hysteria (and its uses in psychiatry, including hysterical personality) is a “term that is best abandoned”; the term was relevant in psychiatric nosology and psychopathology un til the 1980s, when it was dropped in favor of the concepts of conversion, dissociation, and the rise of the somatoform and somatization phenomena and categories. Reasons for do ing away with the term include the psychoanalytical influences from which psychiatry has attempted to distance itself and, as pointed out above, the profoundly entangled preju dice surrounding this uncomfortable (peer-to-peer) diagnosis, one that is incommunicable (to patients). Hysteria includes a great array of symptoms (in extremes, all symptoms not otherwise explained) from screaming, seizures, limb paralysis, stupor, Autism to skin le ions. They are often thought by the interviewer to be exaggerated or theatrical and therefore collide with the nature of symptoms in psychiatry and medicine (interpersonally experienced as real). First coined in 1795, by Ferriar, the expires ion “hysterical conversion” responds to the baffling situation where biochemistry, strum Aural neuroimaging, and electrophysiology (and all state of the art complementary exams) fail to explain the present physical (mostly neurological) symptoms (despite the define son, we have now several studies attempting to shed light into the neurobiology and neu roscience of conversion and somatization— Brooke 2004; Vuilleumier 2014; Perez, Dworetzky, Dickerson, Lung, John, Ballet et al. 2015). Yet of all literature on hysteria, that of the psychoanalytical school it is particularly vast (headed by Freud’s contribution whose input and critical appraisal can be found in Mace 1992a, 1992b) and in neurology (where a distinction of functional from the neurological symptoms is necessary ). These authors have put forward the following theories to explain such sump toms (which are also speculative): that hysteria is “psychological,” sustaining a (cer Mainly outdated) duelist account of the mind–brain and that “hysteria behaves as though anatomy dissociative identity disorder not exist” ( Freud and Brewer 1985/1966: 169) or that hysterical sump toms are inchoate symptoms of a neurological disorder whose manifestation only occurs later in its natural history, again a theory based on little empirical evidence. The first ac count is grounded in Freud’s “revolutionary” considerations (and method) that a reason Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization (and not a cause) could account for the symptoms which would be located in the psycho logical realm. Although the specifics changed throughout his work, he accredited the im portance of trauma which would also constitute a major line of research, the relevance of sexuality, libido, and erotogene sis (see Benedict 1868: 48–54) and secondary gain (the possibility of unconscious and seemingly unrelated gain after the situation). The latter is connected with the extent to which research has been carried out on conversive symptoms in neurology (which share a different background knowledge), thus showing the limited impact on prognosis and sce Dario. Moreover, today, no explanation has yet been given for the full range of symptoms presented; the fact remains that subjects with these symptoms differ markedly from those with factual physical/neurological (and psychiatric) symptoms as well as those which sim late diseases. The next section introduces dissociation which is a discrete field of re search with its own history and conceptual input.

(p. 568) Understanding Dissociation The counterparts of dissociative phenomena can be traced back through time, far before those belonging to hysteria; they may be found in the depictions of pre-historical ecstatic experiences and of demonic possessions and exorcisms during the Inquisition. Yet the use of the words “association” and “dissociation” emerged only in the nineteenth century in medicine, having had two meanings. The first meant the possibility of “unconscious” oc currencies where “the patients’ memory, imagination and perception is changed or some times lost as if dissociated from their personal consciousness”. This consideration was seized upon by psychoanalysts and localizationists and was key to “the possibility of double consciousness” —further considered grounds for “mul tuple personalities.” The second term, dissociation, means the “separation of mental fun sons usually integrated and consciously accessible—a disintegration that involve either/ both memory, identity, perception, emotions and will”. This perspective refers to a disruption of mental functions—in trauma studies, this latter idea would become the main meaning—a patient not knowing who he is or losing parts of his memory despite the remaining elements of consciousness working correctly.

Yet, several conceptual ambiguities undermine these definitions including the discussion about what dissociation stands for, whether dissociation should only be considered in sub Sects with mental disorder, and what dissociative phenomena could be unpacked further. The first question refers to dissociation being considered both a mechanism (epistemolo gy ) and a symptom (phenomenology ) or a category (nosology ) in itself. Examples of dipso cation as a mechanism include all the functional neurological symptoms (similes of neu Urological symptoms without any organic basis) taken as “dissociative symptoms” whereby “dissociative mechanisms” are involved—for example, a burning sensation in the foot with no evidence of skin and neuronal damage, would suggest to the neurologist that the ex placation lies in dissociation/conversion.

Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Dissociation also represents phenomena with an anxious or depressive explanation/mete anise—for example, a patient who complains of being “depersonalized,” “void,” and “numb, as if he can’t feel” when he becomes anxious or depressed. Depersonalization would be aptly considered in such depressive and anxious states and would be an exam ple of a dissociative phenomenon. An important distinction would be to consider them as a state or a trait—dissociation relevant to state occurs over a limited period of time while if it occurs as a trait, it would have been present ever since childhood or adolescence. The relevance of this feature includes further implications as to its meaning as a symptom.

Yet, dissociation also refers to nosological categories (including three categories) as is the case of the depersonalization category in the DSM-5. This category constitutes a cluster of symptoms with an individualized clinical con strict, prognosis, and treatment strategies. The possibility that the label attributed to de personalization may be used to signal both a symptom and a category, provides the key to explaining several misconceptions in clinical practice and research.

Yet, dissociation also refers to nosological categories (including three categories) as is the case of the depersonalization category in the DSM-5. This category constitutes a cluster of symptoms with an individualized clinical con strict, prognosis, and treatment strategies. The possibility that the label attributed to de personalization may be used to signal both a symptom and a category, provides the key to explaining several misconceptions in clinical practice and research.

The second challenge considered above, concerns the disagreement about whether these phenomena are psychopathological (occurring only in patients with mental disorders) and if (p. 569) the counterparts occurring in the population are qualitatively different (and therefore do not receive the same label), or whether there are counterparts in the goner al population where dissociative phenomena are widespread and are only different in quantity/relevance in mental disorders. The latter position leads to several consider sons, such as whether dissociation could even be adaptive—for example, depersonalize son occurring during stressful events or sadness reducing the magnitude of the expert Inced emotion—or a voluntary experience—for example, a person attempting to escape from the boredom or tedium of a moment allows the mind to drift into other contents and later realizes that s/he was not really “there” for a while. Yet, the extent of distress that depersonalization may represent in depressive episodes or the nature of the derealization that occurs in psychosis and schizophrenia are also suggestive of a qualitative difference which needs further exploration (see further detail in Dell and O’Neil 2010 ). Irrespective of former considerations, these phenomena have been studied in burn-out-like periods, after prolonged sleep, hallucinogenic toxicosis, severe melancholic episodes, and schizo ophrenic passivity experiences. The discussion of a quantitative or a qualitative difference between “pathological” and “non-pathological” dissociation is linked with the latter of the above considerations—of a possible phenomenological com plexity where a detailed Inquiry could shed light on the differentiation of individual sorts of dissociative phenomena. If we take derealization, a good example of how a subjective symptom may be phenomenologically complex, we come to the conclusion that it is a sub jective, self-conscious experience and refers to different depictions—for example, forms of derealization could include being “lost to understanding the meaning of other persons’ behaviors” or “feeling that reality has new meanings which are mysterious.” Copse quently, a detailed examination might unpack these phenomena into a larger range of ex periences and give rise to discussing whether some dissociative phenomena are trans- Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization nosological or if this phenomenological detail could help identify the particulars of each situation. Another example is the comprehensively detailed forms of depersonalization (see the EASE interview in Paras, Møleer, Kirchner, Thalbitzer, Jansson, Hardest et al. 2005 ) that allows for a special set of phenomena to be identified which pinpoint the par ticularity of schizophrenic subjectivity. Recently, with regard to anxiety disorders, a Blini cal study has taken this into consideration and has attempted to obtain further knoll edge about the different sorts of dissociative maladies in anxious subjects.

A brief incursion into the history of dissociation shows segregated waves of research (ac cording to changes in the interest shown in the field), for example, a decline in the early twentieth century and a resurgence in the 1970s). Dissociative symptoms are considered in various psychiatric categories (anxiety disorders are a clear example of where several categories may show symptoms); moreover, there are major categories in dissociation, particularly in the DSM-5: depersonalization/derealization disorder, dissociative amnesia (with or without fugue), and dissociative identity disorder. Depersonalization and derealization have been discussed by Griesinger and Degas, whose seminal accounts point to a core disturbance in the way that experiences and thoughts are undertaken by the Self. See an extensive discussion in Dell and O’Neil (2010 ) and their original depictions “as if each of my senses, each and every part of my self was separated from me and could’t offer me any feeling, my eyes see and my spirit has perception but the sensation of what I see is absent” (Griesinger as cited by Sierra 2009: 8) and the “alienation (p. 570) of personality, a state where thoughts and acts be come strange to the self”. Yet today, gathered under the general scope of the whole umbrella, it is possible to identify particular expert Fences constituting the depersonalization umbrella.

First, changes in the accessibility of feelings ranging from a loss of expressing emotions owing to boredom: “I just cannot feel when I’m bored, every experience becomes Frey and bleak and I long to recover that sense of feeling,” to severe disturbances in self-es teem happening in major depression: “the worst is not the suffering but the lack of all feelings; I cannot even cry; there was a time where I could but now I feel as if I have lost all feelings and this is the most miserable I ever felt.”

Secondly, where experiencing reality is concerned, it includes an awareness of foreign Bess or unreality in the person’s setting and means changes when calling upon percep son and tuning into the world. A clear depiction of these changes is the feeling of per plexity in psychosis “everything is strangely new. I have never experienced this, new senses and intense meanings. I cannot cope with all that is new and mysterious; my thoughts rush along in the attempt to feel and make sense of all this”. A recent depiction of a particularly meaningful derealization experience is contained in the Truman Symptoms which appear relevant in the ultra-high risk for psychosis (see clinical re Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization search in Madeira, Bonoldi, Rocchetti, Brandizzi, Samson, Uzis et al. 2016 ), when expert Incing others as if they were actors in a show.

Furthermore, changes in the somatic bodily experience which might include changes in immediate bodily control such as in being ashamed “I cannot move myself despite my longing to disappear, my body becomes heavy and open to everyone to see and even pen etrate my existence,” or a sense of disembodiment or loss of feeling about implicitly hav ing a bodily presence. There also changes in experiences involving thought (and its processes) that can range from difficulty in concentrating “my head feels as if it’s filled with cotton wool,” to feeling the pressure of thoughts rushing beyond understanding, as if “my head was constantly being overwhelmed” (the Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience checklist provides a large range of disturbed thought process; Paras, Holler, Kirchner, Thalbitzer, Jansson, Hardest et al. 2005).

Lastly, there are also assorted forms of detachment from oneself and the world, ranging from the subject feeling that s/he is constantly under self-observation (and actual out-ofthe-body experiences where the subject feels as if s/he is on the outside), to forms of de tachment from the world as if a barrier prevents actual contact with reality or a feeling of changed bodily control as if the body has become a robot. A relevant contribution (cited earlier) comes in the recent accounts on depersonalization/derealization that indicate their role as core schizophrenic experiences including “a disturbance of first person per spective, the loss of natural evidence, an increased introspection, forms of hyper-reflexive ty”.

Dissociative amnesia and fugue comprise several phenomena including moments of ab sorptive-imaginative stance with partial or complete objective and subjective amnesia. Yet these gaps in the awareness or the memory of one’s behavior or experiences might thou ble the subject because there is no controlling his behavior or there is interference with his general functioning and activities by his having no memory of performing some tasks —for example, worrying and returning home because he thought he had forgotten to take his children to the nursery and then realizing that he had performed this task without be ing aware (p. 571) of having done so. Some studies suggest that these symptoms are con current with stress or traumatic events including post-traumatic stress disorder while others suggest they happen according to particular personality traits, out of the blue or even partially in voluntary moments (e.g. in absorbed skinful coping or multitasking). Many of these sub Sects are unaware of their memory loss until someone tells or asks them about it. After this, the experience becomes a subjective awareness of memory loss which can be local zed, selective, or generalized. In the first case, the memory about the events is lost only momentarily and the absence of these data can be unconscious until later on (not immedi Lately following the event). Usually this or these moments are clearly demarcated in his bi ography. Selective amnesia involves segregated memory loss of particular features (e.g. the knowledge of autopsychic time and space orientation) and yet memory is preserved for other elements during that period. Lastly, in generalized amnesia, there is (usually) a Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization sudden onset of the loss of personal information, skills, or knowledge about the world which constitutes the incapacity to retrieve one’s identity in biographical details. In the DSM-5, dissociative amnesia can coincide with fugue—a situation where the subject acts in an unexpected and yet purposeful and personally coherent way. These periods might be short and he may miss work, or they can include longer periods where he travels to an other city gets himself a new name and identity and is unaware of the changes in his life. When the fugue period comes to an end, these subjects may find themselves anxious, per Flexed, ashamed, and even frightened about not remembering what happened during such a period. The end can happen suddenly with no interference of external family, friends, or colleagues although it may also come about through their confrontation.

The category of dissociative identity disorder is the modern account of the old “multiple personality disorder” and refers to the emergence of behaviors (and personality traits) distinct from the person’s usual bearing—as if some (or all) subjects’ actions, speech and demeanor were involuntarily made anew (beyond their control). These features are followed by different grades of amnesia—subjects may be completely un aware of the large range of symptoms while others partially recall these states and char acterize them as intrusions, influences, and interactions by behaviors, thoughts, illusions, and hallucinations as well as the disorganization of lived in space and time. Phenomena logically, it is a heterogeneous category including several states whose overall signify Dance for psychiatry is problematic (for diagnostic and treatment reasons) (see another all-encompassing discussion in Dell and O’Neil 2010 ).

The category of dissociative identity disorder is the modern account of the old “multiple personality disorder” and refers to the emergence of behaviors (and personality traits) distinct from the person’s usual bearing—as if some (or all) subjects’ actions, speech and demeanor were involuntarily made anew (beyond their control). These features are followed by different grades of amnesia—subjects may be completely un aware of the large range of symptoms while others partially recall these states and char acterize them as intrusions, influences, and interactions by behaviors, thoughts, illusions, and hallucinations as well as the disorganization of lived in space and time. Phenomena logically, it is a heterogeneous category including several states whose overall signify Dance for psychiatry is problematic (for diagnostic and treatment reasons) (see another all-encompassing discussion in Dell and O’Neil 2010 ).

It is also possible to consider dissociative symptoms such as those observed and jag nosed by neurologists, which occur in isolated form and have neither a neurological jag noses nor an organic account, such as migraine and epilepsy. For the first type, the concept of dissociation finds its own meaning as the “absence of structural neurological disease” and sustains the designation of “functional neurological symptoms.” It implies that there are no changes in neuroimag ing and biochemical exams which can be accredited to the described experience and ob served behavior. The diagnosis of a dissociative reason in neurology relieves the neurolo gist about the possibility of a “true neurological cause” and patients are often discharged from ambulatory treatment and allocated psychiatric resources. Yet, ominous disorders may reveal dissociative experiences including ones such as derealization, depersonalize son, amnesia, and fugue as well as show (p. 572) all the likely signs and symptoms of mi grain, epilepsy, and stroke. The prevalence of dissociative disorders and/or symptoms in patients with a diagnosis of stroke, is still unknown. Yet its study could help us to find im portent aspects of dissociation in neurology, for instance, in transient ischemic attacks (TIA), dissociative symptoms could lie in either origin, and a symptom could follow local zed vascular damage, thus further clarifying the neuropsychiatric organization of dipso ciative symptoms. Also, and in the case of migranous and epileptic origins, several mete anisms have been proposed—for instance, depersonalization and derealization are partic ularly common in temporal epilepsy (together with dissociative amnesia which can also ensue). The neurological explanation for these symptoms should be excluded (by psychic Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Wrists and neurologists) before considering a dissociative cause. Moreover, researchers should bear in mind that the localization or representation in the brain of a neuropsychi attic symptom does not imply the same for a psychiatric practitioner.

The idea of a “dissociative mechanism” server as the link between dissociation and con version/somatization could mean that psychological symptoms can be transformed into physical symptoms due to lack of mentalization.

Somatization and Conversion As mentioned above, somatization and conversion are linked to the idea of transforming a “psychological” element or issue into a “physical” phenomenon (symptom). Conversion symptoms are sometimes placed under the umbrella of dissociation so as to include other sorts of neurological symptoms (motor and deficit, Censorial, convulsive, and an assorted mixture) that have no justifiable organic cause. Yet, somatization is usually segregated from dissociation and constitutes a broader field of research which, despite being akin to dissociation, has been historically concurrent with it. The term was proposed by Wilhelm Steal and Pierre Janet to consider mental and emotional suffering expressed as bodily symptoms. Today, the category differs and it is accepted that it may be accompanied by anxiety or disordered mood diagnosed according to standard criteria. Furthermore, it is also believed that they (i.e. somatization and dissociation) do not share an inverse relation to feelings—the more someone somatizes something, the less he exp riences it emotionally. Not only is somatization broader, but it also establishes particular intersections with other research fields in psychiatry such as psychosomatic medicine and liaison psychiatry. Conversion and somatization symptoms should be considered separate ly from their categories: as mentioned earlier, these symptoms can occur in isolated form in several mental disorders (e.g. depression or personality disorders). Yet there are ate Dories with a particular clinical history and treatment. These diagnoses should be consed red only after excluding all other disorders (including neurological or psychiatric Visor Hers) if the presentation includes somatization (plus pain) and neurological symptoms (mostly referring to conversion symptoms). The clinician should bear in mind some sug Festive features including prior conversions, preceding emotional stress, anxiety, or dys phobia or symptoms that are presented indifferently ( belle indifference ) if the subject has particular personality traits, if there is apparent secondary gain or if there is improve Bent upon suggestion or sedation. (p. 573) Yet the same sources suggest that when taking into account the prior history of conversion, any of these elements might be unreliable in a differential diagnosis. Moving toward modern psychiatric nosology we have observed a simplification of Gaze’s original fifty-nine criteria for Briquet’s Syndrome to the thirty-seven DSM-third symptoms and later, into the four sorts of items of DSM-fourth (four bodily, two gastrointestinal, one pseudoneurological, and one sexual). ICD criteria for somatization disorder show little agreement with these DSM criteria which, together with the fact that many of these experiences and behaviors are culture-specific, make di Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization agnosis treacherous outside the Western world. Due to the uniformity of culturally influx Inced personality traits, it seems that analyzing temperament and character might help diagnosis. While multidimensional personality traits ap pear to be involved in somatization and conversion disorder there is no specific personal ty associated with them. Somatization seems to be related to high harm avoidance and low self-directedness—cluster C personality features while con version and dissociation are related to high novelty-seeking—cluster B personality fea Cures. Low self-directedness and cooperativeness seem to run the risk of dissociation par ticularly if they express high novelty-seeking while somatization occurs in subjects show ing high harm avoidance. Robbins and Kirmayer (2009 ) at tempt three operational definitions of somatization high levels of functional somatic distress, hypochondriasis, and patients showing current major depression or anti ety.

Together the diagnostic criteria for hysteria, conversion, and dissociation appear to be discrepant (suggesting historical uncertainties and quandaries), insufficient (unreliable and lacking validity and prognostic significance), and of little practical use (e.g. the psy chiatric concept as used by neurologists, and the impossibility of using it to explain to pa taints what they are experiencing). A part of the problem lies in the assortment of con cents used in these fields (clinical and research) which include (among others) “somatiza son,” “conversion,” “hysterical,” “functional symptoms,” “psychogenic,” “somatoform,” and “dissociative.” To some extent, they represent overlapping clinical features and at other times, they are used outside their conceptual field. Additionally, the use of these terms is dubious as for hysteria psychiatry has made a determined effort to remove this label, most of these patients are referred to neurologists who use a different Fermi nology and the diagnosis cannot be used in practice (with the patient) as it is pejorative and the same is the case with somatization where the practical distinction as regards conversion is not all that simple (as physical versus neurological does not stand and per Baps the meaningful clinical distinction is merely between the acute symptoms (needing referral to emergency wards) and the gradual onset of symptoms (seen by general phys sans)).

Together the diagnostic criteria for hysteria, conversion, and dissociation appear to be discrepant (suggesting historical uncertainties and quandaries), insufficient (unreliable and lacking validity and prognostic significance), and of little practical use (e.g. the psy chiatric concept as used by neurologists, and the impossibility of using it to explain to pa taints what they are experiencing). A part of the problem lies in the assortment of con cents used in these fields (clinical and research) which include (among others) “somatiza son,” “conversion,” “hysterical,” “functional symptoms,” “psychogenic,” “somatoform,” and “dissociative.” To some extent, they represent overlapping clinical features and at other times, they are used outside their conceptual field. Additionally, the use of these terms is dubious as for hysteria psychiatry has made a determined effort to remove this label, most of these patients are referred to neurologists who use a different Fermi nology and the diagnosis cannot be used in practice (with the patient) as it is pejorative and the same is the case with somatization where the practical distinction as regards conversion is not all that simple (as physical versus neurological does not stand and per Baps the meaningful clinical distinction is merely between the acute symptoms (needing referral to emergency wards) and the gradual onset of symptoms (seen by general phys sans)).

Extensive research effort has allowed several breakthroughs and “there is a growing body of evidence linking the dissociative disorders to a trauma history, and to specific neural mechanisms” (Spiegel, Loewenstein, Lewis-Fernandez, Şar, Simon, Vermetten et al. 2011) and led to (an evidence-based) reorganization of the dissociative category in the DSM-5. De spite the developments of recent interest and reaching a new definition in our diagnostic manuals, research in the area continues to be lost in the operationalization of subjectivity (essential) and is still unable to make full sense of what are considered “unexplained symptoms.” Perhaps a necessary first step is researching the phenomenology of these symptoms (phenomenological psychopathology) to further our knowledge on their spec ficities and differences, possibly richer detail could allow unpacking into new, assorted, or enhanced symbols—the latter being essential for transnational (and clinical) studies.

Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Bibliography Abercrombie J.. Inquiries Concerning the Intellectual Powers and the Investigation of Truth. New York: J. and J. Harper. American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5®). Arlington American Psychiatric Publishing. Baker D., Hunter E., Lawrence E., Medford N., Patel M., Senior C., et al.. “Leper sonalisation Disorder: Clinical Features of 204 Cases.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 182: 428–433. Benedict M.. Elektrotherapie. Vienna: Tender. Bishop E. R. and Torch E. M.. “Dividing ‘Hysteria’: A Preliminary Investigation of Conversion Disorder and Psychalgia.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 167: 348–356. Bliss E. L.. “Studies of Sleep Deprivation—Relationship to Schizophrenia.” Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry 81: 348–359. Brand B. L., Classed C. C., McNary S. W., and Zaveri P.. “A Review of Dissociative Disorders Treatment Studies.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 197: 646–654. Brand B. L., Laius R., Vermetten E., Loewenstein R. J., and Spiegel D.. “Where Are We Going? An Update on Assessment, Treatment, and Neurobiological Research in Dissociative Disorders as We Move Toward the DSM-5.” Journal of Trauma & Dissociation 13: 9–31. Brooke M. R.. “A Neuroscience of Hysteria?” Current Opinion in Psychiatry 17: 465–469. Chariot J.-M.. Clinical Lectures on Diseases of the Nervous System (Psychology Revivals). Rutledge. Cloninger C. R.. “A Systematic Method for Clinical Description and Classification of Personality Variants.” Arch Gen Psychiatry 44: 573–588. Cloninger C. R.. “A Psychobiological Model of Temperament and Character.” Arch Gen Psychiatry 50: 975. Conrad K.. Beginning Schizophrenia: Attempt for a Gestalt-analysis of Delusion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dell P. F. and O’Neil J. A.. Dissociation and the Dissociative Disorders. New York: Rutledge. Degas L. and Mouser F.. La Dépersonnalisation. Paris, Felix Lean.

Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Bibliography Abercrombie J.. Inquiries Concerning the Intellectual Powers and the Investigation of Truth. New York: J. and J. Harper. American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5®). Arlington American Psychiatric Publishing. Baker D., Hunter E., Lawrence E., Medford N., Patel M., Senior C., et al.. “Leper sonalisation Disorder: Clinical Features of 204 Cases.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 182: 428–433. Benedict M.. Elektrotherapie. Vienna: Tender. Bishop E. R. and Torch E. M.. “Dividing ‘Hysteria’: A Preliminary Investigation of Conversion Disorder and Psychalgia.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 167: 348–356. Bliss E. L.. “Studies of Sleep Deprivation—Relationship to Schizophrenia.” Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry 81: 348–359. Brand B. L., Classed C. C., McNary S. W., and Zaveri P.. “A Review of Dissociative Disorders Treatment Studies.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 197: 646–654. Brand B. L., Laius R., Vermetten E., Loewenstein R. J., and Spiegel D.. “Where Are We Going? An Update on Assessment, Treatment, and Neurobiological Research in Dissociative Disorders as We Move Toward the DSM-5.” Journal of Trauma & Dissociation 13: 9–31. Brooke M. R.. “A Neuroscience of Hysteria?” Current Opinion in Psychiatry 17: 465–469. Chariot J.-M.. Clinical Lectures on Diseases of the Nervous System (Psychology Revivals). Rutledge. Cloninger C. R.. “A Systematic Method for Clinical Description and Classification of Personality Variants.” Arch Gen Psychiatry 44: 573–588. Cloninger C. R.. “A Psychobiological Model of Temperament and Character.” Arch Gen Psychiatry 50: 975. Conrad K.. Beginning Schizophrenia: Attempt for a Gestalt-analysis of Delusion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dell P. F. and O’Neil J. A.. Dissociation and the Dissociative Disorders. New York: Rutledge. Degas L. and Mouser F.. La Dépersonnalisation. Paris, Felix Lean.

Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Fleming G. W. T. H.. “Mescaline and Depersonalization.” (Journal of Neurology and Psychopathy xvi: 193).

Freida M., Spitz S. P., Pause W., Zimprich F., Leaner-Baumgartner E., Baumgartner C., et al.. “The Stigma of Mental Illness: Anticipation and Attitudes Among Patients with Epileptic, Dissociative or Somatoform Pain Disorder.” International Review of Psychiatry 19: 123–129.

Freud S. and Brewer J. (1895/1966). Studies On Hysteria. New York: Avon Books.

Fuchs T.. “Corporealized and Disembodied Minds: A Phenomenological View of the Body in Melancholia and Schizophrenia.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 12: 95– 107.

Fuchs T. and Schlimme J. E.. “Embodiment and Psychopathology: A Phenomenology cal Perspective.” Current Opinion in Psychiatry 22: 570–575.

Fusar-Poi P., Owes O., Valmaggia L., and McGuire P.. “ ‘Truman’ Signs and Vul nerability to Psychosis.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 193: 168 (Just one page)

Hatfield P. D. and Gaze S. B.. “Prognosis and Differential Diagnosis of Conversion Reactions.” Disease of the Nervous System 23: 623–631.

(p. 575) Janet P. F.. The Mental State of Hysterical. Washington DC: University Publications of America.

Klaus A.. “Melancholia: Cine art von depersonalisation. Affect und affektive Stoerungen.” In T. Fuchs and C. Mundt (eating disorders.) Affect und affektive Storungen, pp. 169– 186. Paderborn: Schoningh.

Langfeldt G.. “Diagnosis and Prognosis of Schizophrenia.” Proceedings of the Roy al Society of Medicine 53: 1047–1052.

Long S., Waits W., and Diebold C.. “Dissociative Amnesia and DSM-fourth-TR Cluster C Personality Traits.” Psychiatry (Edgmont) 3: 51–55.

Lynn S. J. and Hue J. W. (eating disorders.). Dissociation: Clinical and Theoretical Perspectives. New York, NY, USA: Guilford Press.

Mace C. J. (1992a). “Hysterical Conversion. I: A History.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 161: 369–377.

Mace C. J. (1992b). “Hysterical Conversion. second: A Critique.” The British Journal of Psychic try 161: 378–389.

Madeira L., Bonoldi I., Rocchetti M., Brandizzi M., Samson C., Uzis M., et al.. “Prevalence and Implications of Truman Symptoms in Subjects at Ultra High Risk for Psy chosis.” Psychiatry Research 238: 270–276.

Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Madeira L., Carmenates S., Cost C., Linhares L., Stanghellini G., Figueira M. L., et al.. “Basic Self-Disturbances beyond Schizophrenia: Discrepancies and Affinities in Panic Disorder—An Empirical Clinical Study.” Psychopathology Mayer-Gross W.. “On Depersonalization.” British Journal of Medical Psychology 15: 103–126.

Maiese M.. “Dissociative Identity Disorder and the Fragmentation of the Self.” In Embodied Selves and Divided Minds, pp. 183–226. New York: Oxford University Press.

Mulder R. T. and Joyce P. R.. “Temperament and the Structure of Personality Visor der Symptoms.” Psychological Medicine 27: 99–106.

Paras J., Holler P., Kirchner T., Thalbitzer J., Jansson L., Hardest P., et al.. “EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience.” Psychopathology 38: 236–258.

Perez D. L., Dworetzky B. A., Dickerson before Christ, Lung L., John R., Ballet G., et al.. “An Integrative Neurocircuit Perspective on Psychogenic Nonepileptic Seizures and Fun tonal Movement Disorders.” Clinical EEG and Neuroscience 46: 4–15.

Parley M. J. and Gaze S. B.. “Hysteria—The Stability and Usefulness of Clinical Cri Beria: A Quantitative Study Based on a Follow-up Period of Six to Eight Years in 39 Pa taints.” New England Journal of Medicine 266: 421–6 Purcell J. J., Robins E., and Cohen M. E.. “Observations on Clinical Aspects of Hys Beria; A Quantitative Study of 50 Hysteria Patients and 156 Control Subjects.” Journal of the American Medical Association 146: 902–909.

Ruskin M., Talbot J. A., and Meyerson A. T.. “Diagnosis of Conversion Reactions. Predictive Value of Psychiatric Criteria.” Journal of the American Medicine Association 197: 530–534.

Robbins J. M. and Kirmayer L. J.. “Attributions of Common Somatic Symptoms.” Psychological Medicine 21: 1029–1045.

Serra L., Faddy L., Buccione I., Caltagirone C., and Carlesimo G. A.. “Psychogenic and Organic Amnesia. A Multidimensional Assessment of Clinical, Neuroradiological, Neuropsychological and Psychopathological Features.” Behavioral Neurology 18: 53–64.

Sierra M.. Depersonalization. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Slater E.. “Diagnosis of ‘Hysteria’.” British Medical Journal 1: 1395–1399.

(p. 576) Spiegel D. and Cardeña E.. “Disintegrated Experience: The Dissociative Disorders Revisited.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 100: 366–378.

Spiegel D., Loewenstein R. J., Lewis-Fernandez R., Şar fifth., Simon D., Vermetten E., et al.. “Dissociative Disorders in DSM-5.” Depression and Anxiety 28: 824–852.

Hysteria, Dissociation, Conversion, and Somatization Spiegel D., Lewis-Fernandez R., Laius R., Vermetten E., Simon D., and Friedman M.. “Dissociative Disorders in DSM-5.” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 9: 299– 326.

Stanghellini G.. “Embodiment and Schizophrenia.” World Psychiatry 8: 56–59.

Steinberg M., Rounsaville B., and Cicchetti D. fifth.. “The Structured Clinical Inter view for DSM-third-R Dissociative Disorders: Preliminary Report on a New Diagnostic In strument.” American Journal of Psychiatry 147: 76–82.

Vuilleumier P.. “Brain Circuits Implicated in Psychogenic Paralysis in Conversion Disorders and Hypnosis.” Neurophysiologie Clinique/Clinical Neurophysiology 44: 323– 337.

Watson C. G. and Buranen C.. “The Frequencies of Conversion Reaction Sump toms.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 88: 209–211.

Wigan A. L.. A New View of Insanity: The Duality of Mind. Reprint. Malibu: Joseph Simon.

World Health Organization.. The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders. Geneva: Diamond Pocket Books (P) Ltd.

Maria Luisa Figueira Department of Psychiatry, University of Lisbon Lu's Madeira Department of Psychiatry, University of Lisbon Obsessions and Phobias Obsessions and Phobias Claire Ahern, Daniel B. Fassnacht, and Michael Kyrios The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article examines the phenomenology of two unwanted intrusive experiences—pho bias and obsessions. The article begins with two common examples of phobia, social pho bia and agoraphobia, characterized by the experience of fear; an intense concentration of anxiety to specific situations or stimuli. This anxiety creates intense feelings of vulnerabil ity in one’s environment, and overwhelming urges to avoid specific stressful situations. While anxiety is only one of various emotional states associated with obsessions, an inflate ed sense of responsibility and pathological doubt, particularly about moral self-worth, are also central features in the experience of obsessions. This subjective experience provokes unease in one’s self-world interactions, leading to an intense quest for certainty and per Section, propelling individuals into compulsive responses and magnification of obsessions. While phobias and obsessions are considered typical of human experience, the intraper Tonal management of these phenomena leads to persistence and magnification of dis tress, intrusiveness of symptoms and dysfunction.

Keywords: phobias, obsessions, anxiety, doubt, morality, self-worth, responsibility, certainty # Introduction THIS article examines the phenomenology of two particular unwanted intrusive expert Fences—phobias and obsessions. Both are repetitive, uncontrollable, and are recognized to originate from within the person. The concept of phobias and obsession can be both a dis tint emotional state, a central symptom of a disorder, or part of an entire range of psy chiatric disorders. Both phobias and obsessions can involve almost any situation, and may occur to a minor degree in almost anybody. The chapter begins by characterizing phobias as an experience associated with fear; an intense concentration of anxiety to specific situ Cations or stimuli. Two common and disabling phobic conditions, social phobia and angora phobia, are then presented. The chapter then describes the varied phenomenology and emotions associated with obsessions. While anxiety is often an emotional state in oases Obsessions and Phobias ions, pathological doubt, particularly about moral self-worth, is also argued to be a cen Aral feature in the experience of obsessions.

Phobia The experience of fear is a typical, evolutionary important sensation, which helps individ Gals learn to avoid or manage dangerous situations and objects. However, in extreme cases, individuals experience “a fear of an imaginary evil or an un due fear of a real one”. Phobic fear is an intense and persistent anxiety, dis proportionate to the actual threat. Individuals describe this fear to be beyond voluntary control—even in the face of reason—and often go great lengths avoiding feared situation. Phobias are largely categorized according to the source of the anxiety-pro Coking stimuli as either external (e.g. agoraphobia, social or animal phobias, phobias re Bated to stimuli in the environment) or internal (e.g. illness, obsessions, worries).

(p. 578) Social phobia, for instance, can be considered an excessive variant of shyness. The individual fears behaving unacceptably in a social situation, and that such “misbehave ior” will lead to disastrous consequences (e.g. losing face or ridicule from others). A strong desire to convey a favorable impression of oneself in social situ Cations, paired with excessive self-consciousness, leads the social phobic to experience themselves negatively “as a social object” ( Clark 2001: 407). The overestimated likely hood and/or severity of embarrassment or humiliation makes socially anxious individuals avoid social situations. They may also avoid associated cues during such social interact sons (e.g. avoiding eye contact), followed by extensive rumination after social encounters. While some individuals experience a physiologically intense fear rec son in specific performance-orientated situations (e.g. public speaking, signing doc Bents), others feel embarrassment and shame in social situations. Together, these factors create an overwhelming feeling of separateness and strangeness in one’s social environment.

Lidia, thirty-six years, recalled that she was “always shy” as a child, preferring to play alone and draw. Her last significant relationship ended six years ago. Lidia and her ex-partner had slowly developed their relationship over many years, but ultimately Lidia felt that her social anxiety “put a burden” on the relationship.

Lidia felt “too awkward” to try face-to-face dating, but was active in an online group chat and had developed a close connection with one of the other members who lived in another country.

Lidia created a successful online business, which enabled her to work indepen Gently, however the business increasingly required her to make telephone calls.

Lidia dreaded these calls; she felt she “knew” that others could sense her anxiety through her trembling voice. Lidia feared that she was misrepresenting her prod Obsessions and Phobias uct, and so she would procrastinate from making phone calls, or avoid them alto ether.

Derived from Greek origins and meaning “fear of the market place,” agoraphobia often includes a fear of social ridicule from others. However, it is not a distinct single fear of so Dial interactions but rather a collection of avoidance responses to multiple feared stimuli related to the need to escape or feel safe. The term describes a varying combination of anxiety including fear of being in an exposed place, or being unable to receive help (e.g. in an enclosed space, or crowded, remote areas), with individuals commonly fearing that they are noticeable and socially unacceptable to others. Agoraphobic fears occur in many combinations and usually are associated with other symptoms such as panic attacks, feel Dings of depersonalization, depression, and also obsessions, as the individual vigilantly monitors their bodily sensations as the principal means to assess how safe they feel in their world. The agoraphobic individual tends to have a “fixed safety base” (e.g. home) often marked by its familiarity rather than actual safety from being alone and helpless; moving away from this base is associated with increasing anxiety and avoidance behavior.

Noel, fifty-four years, lives with his wife and adult daughter. Eighteen months pre Piously he had a fall at home, surgery on his hip, and a lengthy recovery. Despite his doctor’s insistence that he could return to work, and that work would improve his physical rehabilitation, Noel felt unsteady and “weak.” On his first attempt to drive after surgery, Noel recalled quickly feeling tense and light headed, and he returned home almost immediately.

Even though Noel was often alone, for days at a time, he felt comfortable in his home. Noel’s doctor noted that he would see him in the waiting room, hours be fore his appointment was scheduled. Noel had recently been driving more fre quently but dissociative identity disorder not drive to “new places” on his own, asking his daughter to chap Crone him to his first session.

(p. 579) Obsessions Obsessions involve the experience of unwanted, intrusive, and uncontrollable thoughts, images, or urges. Obsessional intrusions are invasive to the flow of con sciousness, occurring against one’s will as unpleasant and unwanted disturbances. Both the content and process of the obsession is experienced as unacceptable and distressing. This leads to a secondary defensive component in attempting to control and avoid the fears associated with the obsession. Although obsessions can take a variety of forms, most commonly they are experienced as unwanted and intrusive thoughts. For example, an individual may have the obsessive thought that “I could kill everyone in the car if I just swerved into oncoming traffic” or “Am I catching germs from this?” Other less frequent forms of obsessions, images, and urges Obsessions and Phobias are just as repugnant and objectionable (e.g. unwanted images of incestuous acts, the urge to push someone in front of an oncoming train).

Intrusive thoughts in the general population and in obsessional patients do not differ in their occurrence or content, but in the appraisal of the intrusions. Most people are able to generally ignore or dismiss unwanted intrusions that enter into our consciousness as ir relevant, unhelpful, and superfluous to requirements. For the obsessive individual, how ever, the intrusion is taken as evidence that these thoughts reveal some personal mean ing about the person’s true self as “mad, bad, dangerous—or all three” ( Rachman 2003: 6). Obsessions are therefore distressing to the individual for stressing and contradicting one’s sense of self. Clark argues that one of the key features of obsessions is that they are experienced to be inconsistent with the core values of the self. Yet, given that the majority of the population experience intrusive phenomena, how is it that only certain people will make misappraisals of the meaning of their intrusions?

Aardema and O’Condor propose that obsessions are distressing for representing a feared possibility for who a person is, or might become. In particular, fears of moral selfstanding are often central to deriving threat from one’s own thoughts, albeit experienced as unwanted and intrusive, and provoking unease in one’s self–world interactions. Oases ions can be experienced as significant markers of moral standing, or even as morally equivalent to unacceptable actions. This leads the individual to inflate the significance of their thoughts and try to sup press such thoughts as a way of disproving one’s moral unacceptability and resolve “contradictory aspects of a single self” (Kempke and Luyten 2007: 293).

Moreover, negative moral interpretations can be made even when the content of oases ions does not involve moral themes such as sex, religion, or ethics. For instance, one in dividual judged her obsessions regarding symmetry to be morally unacceptable because they were “crazy” (O’Weill 1999 ). Another who had thoughts of harming his two-year-old son found his obsessions distressing because of the implications that he was an inherent ly evil person ( O’Neil, Cather, Fished, and Kafka 2005 ). This individual was driven to hold his son after an intrusion, not to ensure that his son was safe but to reassure himself that he was not evil and was able to resist “temptation.”

Nate is a twenty-six-year-old married engineer living with his wife and newborn son. Four months prior to presenting for treatment, Nate observed a humorous discussion led by (p. 580) colleagues at work about unusual fetishes. While he found the conversation uncomfortable, he rationalized “it din’t mean anything, so I thought that was it.” However, later that evening while bathing his son, Nate re ported a horrifying image of performing a sexual act on his son. As well as being highly distressed by the content of these repugnant images, Nate experienced shame and disgust at himself for having such thoughts, and feared that he may be a latent pedophile; “What father does this?... what sort of person does this?!”

Obsessions and Phobias Empirical research also supports that obsessional individuals are more likely to make negative moral inferences about themselves based on their intrusions, that their “feared self” is significantly more likely to consist of bad and immoral traits, and that obsessions reflect a fear as to who the person might be or might become. Similarly, Boron, Molding, Kyrios, and Nedeljkovic (2008 ) demon stated that “sensitivity” in the self-referent domain of morality (i.e. perceiving morality as important to self-worth, but concurrently feeling inadequate in this domain) is linked to obsessive-compulsive disorder (obsessive-compulsive disorder), but not to other anxiety disorders.

Sensitivity in moral self-worth has also been associated with overestimating threat, and an inflated sense of being pivotally responsibility for preventing harm, or trying to pre vent harm. For the individual experiencing obsessions, the world is generally experienced as unsafe. The individual experiences a constant state of unease as the potential for threat seems to lurk everywhere, even in those places generally deemed innocuous. The associated moral imperative to respond is therefore strong as the obsessive individual fears the guilt from not behaving responsibly, attributing greater importance to errors of omission than errors of com mission. However, the overestimation of personal responsibility intense Dies the potential severity of any harmful consequence. Thus, the obsessive individual as Fesses the severity of detrimental consequence as high, being unable to ignore intrusions, which compel the obsessive individual to devote immediate attention to reducing the threat thereby promoting a spur to action.

Nate dissociative identity disorder not share the experiences with his wife for fear that she would take his son away from him, and he avoided being left alone with his son, or helping with bathing and changing. Instead, Nate became hyper-responsible in caring for his son by compulsively cleaning his bottles and checking the locks on his son’s win dow, which over time, generalized to cleaning and checking the whole house. Up on his wife’s requests that Nate spend more time with their son, he disclosed his unacceptable fears and with her unwavering support and reassurance, Nate was able to help with their son. However, the thoughts remained and although he doubted their validity, he could not completely dismiss them, as he could “never be sure” that he would not act on them. The insatiable doubt tormented him, prompting excessive vague reassurance-seeking from his wife. Although his oases ions were highly distressing and his compulsions disabling, the shame associated with his experiences meant that Nate dissociative identity disorder not initially disclose his obsessional symptoms, instead presenting for a fear of flying.

The obsessive individual desires certainty that their actions have had the necessary abili ty to absolve responsibility and threat. The desire for absolute certainty leaves the oases chive individual suspicious, because when there is room for error, there is room for doubt. The overarching uncertainty stems from a pathological doubt about the order of the world and basic assumptions that we normally take for granted. For instance, normally we trust that our house will not be crushed by a random meteor and feel assured in the small numbers that suggest that it is a minute possibility. In contrast, Obsessions and Phobias the obsessive individual (p. 581) focuses on the marginal possibility of such an event mak ing it real and threatening. O’Condor and Robillard further suggest that individu als experiencing obsessions doubt their own sensory information. Instead of examining the available evidence in what they can see, they fear what they cannot see. Indeed, obsessive-compulsive disorder has been associated with deficits in non-verbal information (see Muller and Roberts 2005 for a review), and low confidence in their memory and related processes (e.g. decisionmaking, concentration, and attention; Nedeljkovic and Kyrios 2007 ). The distrust in avail able sensory information leads one to favor the subjective and emotional narrative that arises from the content of their obsessions.

Where we can normally trust in those things that we cannot be absolutely certain, the ob sessive individual maintains an intense quest for certainty, leading to meticulousness and a pursuit of perfection. Objective evidence that one would normally deem sufficient is considered as not good enough. Thus, obsessional individuals continue to attune to the minutiae and at the expense of the bigger picture, spending excessive time to finish the task at hand. As it is impossible to complete tasks perfectly within the confines of an ob jective clock-time, the individual frequently feels overwhelmed and suffocated. Alterna Lively, they may experience a rush as they perceive themselves able to successfully, albeit temporarily, ward off their threats. However, the pursuit of perfection further propels the individual into deeper obsession.

Any temporary sense of omnipotence is however wiped out by an inability to control (or appraise) intrusive thoughts. Widely recognized as one of the distinguishing features of obsessions is that the individual has insight; they are aware that their intrusive thoughts come from within, that they are unreasonable, and that they have voluntary control over their actions. Nevertheless, they feel compelled, unable to re Dist, and that a response is inevitable. Moreover, the individual recognizes the arbitrary and nonsensical nature for their obsession; one individual compulsively washed his hands to resolve contamination from outside his house, and yet he comfort ably shared his bed with his pet dog who is housed outside during the day. This incongru Once between the individual’s rational thought and emotive experience is not only Grus rating, confusing, and anxiety-provoking, but also associated with a deep sense of shame. In an effort to control approval from others, the individuals tend to conceal their obsessions, and present for treatment after suffering for a prolonged period.

Although insight is widely considered important for distinguishing obsessions from an overvalued idea or delusion, some scholars suggest that obsessive-compulsive disorder may be better characterized as a belief disorder. Obsessive individuals are prone to inferential confusion, a faulty reasoning process whereby the individual mistakes a small hypotheti cal possibility for a real probability ( Aardema, Emmelkamp, and O’Condor 2005 ). As lamented by Dale Luke and Iazzetta (2008 ), “the compulsive adherence to an info ercible doubt represents an equivalent to the delusional absolute certainty: the doubt is the psychotic feature of the phobic-obsessives”.

Obsessions and Phobias # Conclusion Both fear and intrusions can be considered typical human experiences. It is the intraper Tonal management of these experiences however, that leads to persistence and magnifica son of (p. 582) subjective distress, intrusiveness of symptoms, and hence, dysfunction. The anxiety in phobia creates an intense feeling of vulnerability in one’s environment, and overwhelming urges to avoid the particular stressful situation. Obsessions also may incur orate intense anxiety and avoidance. This chapter suggests that obsessions incorporate uncertainty in moral self-worth, pathological doubt, an inflated sense of responsibility, shame, and guilt. This experience provokes unease in one’s self–world interactions, lead ing the obsessive individual to an intense quest for certainty and perfection, ultimately propelling the individual into deeper obsession. PAGE_BREAK Claire Ahern Brain and Psychological Sciences Research Center, Swinburne University of Techno ogy, Australia Daniel B. Fassnacht Research School of Psychology, The Australian National University Michael Kyrios Research School of Psychology, The Australian National University Obsessions and Phobias O’Weill S. A.. “Living with Obsessive-compulsive Disorder: A Case Study of a Woman’s Construction of Self.” Counseling Psychology Quarterly 12: 73–86. O’Neil S. E., Cather C., Fished A. K., and Kafka M.. “ ‘Not Knowing if I was a Pe dophile...’—Diagnostic Questions and Treatment Strategies in a Case of obsessive-compulsive disorder.” Harvard Review of Psychiatry 13: 186–196. Rachman S.. “A Cognitive Theory of Obsessions.” Behavior Research and Therapy 35: 793–802. Rachman S.. The Treatment of Obsessions. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Rush B.. “On the Different Species of Phobia.” The Weekly Magazine of Original Essays, Fugitive Pieces, and Interesting Intelligence, 1: 177–180. Salkovskis P. M.. “Obsessional-compulsive Problems: A Cognitive-behavioral Analysis.” Behavior Research and Therapy 23: 571–583. Shafran R., Thordarson D. S., and Rachman S.. “Thought-action Fusion in Oases chive Compulsive Disorder.” Journal of Anxiety Disorders 10: 379–391. Straps E.. “Ein Beitrag zur Pathologie der Zwangserscheinungen.” Monatsschrift für Psychiatric und Neurologie 98: 61–101. Trig D.. “The Body of the Other: Intercorporeality and the Phenomenology of Agoraphobia.” Continental Philosophy Review 46: 413–429. von Gebsattel fifth. E.. Die Welt des Zwangskranken; Prolegomena Diner medizinis teen Anthropologie. Berlin: Stringer. Roe A. L. and Salkovskis P. M.. “Causing Harm and Allowing Harm: A Study of Beliefs in Obsessional Problems.” Behavior Research and Therapy 38: 1141–1162.

Claire Ahern Brain and Psychological Sciences Research Center, Swinburne University of Techno ogy, Australia Daniel B. Fassnacht Research School of Psychology, The Australian National University Michael Kyrios Research School of Psychology, The Australian National University Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion Clara S. Humpston The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Thought insertion is a puzzling psychotic phenomenon that is usually considered a deli signal belief and has specific diagnostic significance for schizophrenia; this article exam Ines the phenomenology of thought insertion in terms of the senses of agency and owner ship over thought and also in relation to hallucinations as a spectrum of unusual expert Fences, and argues that thought insertion is first and foremost a near-sensory experience before any secondary delusion formation. It goes on to outline the paradoxical nature of thought insertion when considered as a delusion and offers a new line of inquiry which views it a duplex phenomenon combining a generative sensory experience with an ex placatory delusional elaboration. The article posits that by investigating the two related yet distinct layers of the same phenomenon in question, we will be able to better under stand the subjective experience of thought insertion.

Keywords: psychosis, delusion formation, sense of self, hallucinations, phenomenology, immunity principle, thought interference # Introduction WHEN we think, how do we know the thoughts are ours? Furthermore, how do we know we are the thinkers of such thoughts? The vast majority of us would never even consider asking these questions because nothing is more taken for granted, nothing defines our autonomy as an individual more than the feeling that we are in charge of our thinking processes, our emotions, and actions. As a result, questions like these are almost “re served” to the realm of philosophical investigation which the layperson would likely view as far-fetched and esoteric. However, extraordinary as it may sound, this feeling of being able to think freely and being “in charge” is actually a luxury to some.

I am speaking of individuals who have experienced thought insertion and other forms of thought interference (e.g. thought withdrawal, broadcast), which are classed as “first- Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion rank” symptoms of schizophrenia spectrum psychoses and hence have special diagnostic significance (see the article on first-rank symptoms in the current volume). These sump toms quite physically rob the individual of their ability to think their own thoughts and al so the feeling of being the thinker. As such, questions about thinking are no longer limit ed to the world of philosophical Inquiry and have indeed become a constant theme, or even a “reality” for the individual afflicted with psychosis. The implications of losing one’s ability to generate and control thoughts are also immense, often causing great pain and suffering to the individual and sometimes (albeit far less commonly) even leading to forensic consequences. But how could thought interference possibly happen in the first place, other than when explained as disorders of the brain and nothing else? Surely any “rational person” would never endorse such absurd expert Fences as a part of “external reality”?! Assertions of this kind are made far too readily by clinicians and researchers alike, often without pausing for a moment to ponder the mean ing and significance beyond the symptoms as treatment targets.

(p. 585) The main focus of the current essay is thought insertion from a phenomenological perspective. I aim to discuss some of the current theories of thought insertion and ad dress it not only as a psychotic symptom but also as a fundamental disturbance of one’s self, which both challenges and forms one’s reality; further, perhaps in contrary to the current medical definition of thought insertion, I will put forward the argument that the experience of thought insertion alone does not always constitute a delusional belief. I will then consider the relationships between thought insertion and other psychotic phenom na (in particular auditory–verbal hallucinations) and finally, theoretical implications of viewing thought insertion on a spectrum of self-disturbances.

The Subjective Experience of Thought Infer # son Of all the available first-person accounts of schizophrenia and related psychoses, there are actually very few direct descriptions about what it is like to experience inserted thoughts; examples of thought insertion are more frequently found in older clinical reports, such as this often-used quote from Mellon: I look out of the window and I think the garden looks nice and the grass looks cool, but the thoughts of Eamonn Andrews come into my mind. There are no other thoughts there, only his... He treats my mind like a screen and flashes his thoughts on to it like you flash a picture.

The reason for the lack of first-person narratives (i.e. written by sufferers themselves) could be that thought insertion often occurs in florid psychotic states which, when re called during phases of remission, may no longer possess the salience and immediacy of Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion the original experience; however, this example from Payne offers an insightful and poignant summary: Here is a related conundrum: are you in control of your own thoughts? It sounds like a very odd question, but it’s at the core of the experience of schizophrenia.

A dying person who is normal, even a person in front of a firing squad, has Echoic es.

A psychotic person is less, even minimally, in control of his thoughts.

It is interesting how she formulated thought (dis)ownership as a question rather than a statement (“are you in control?”) and viewed it as “the core of schizophrenia”—if Mellon’s vignette is a textbook case of thought insertion as a delusion, Payne’s account to a certain extent challenges the notion of delusional conviction and perhaps whether thought infer son is a delusion at all (I will later argue that the answer is not clear-cut). If one is able to question the delusional nature of a thought or belief, by default that thought will no longer qualify as a delusion at least in an orthodox psychiatric sense, which defines thought insertion as “the delusion that certain thoughts are not the patient’s own but im planted by an outside agency” ( Elder, Harrison, and Bowen 2006: 12). Does this imply that once someone starts to question the veracity of the experience, the experience will automatically “disqualify” as a delusion or even disappear altogether? However, as Payne points out in the next two sentences, a psychotic person is still “minimally in control of his thoughts.” This creates a (p. 586) paradox: if one cannot lose control over one’s thoughts unless they are delusional, then the mere realization that these lost thoughts are in fact one’s own would disqualify them from being delusional. Labeling thought insertion as a delusion thus becomes the consensus as it is seemingly the most convenient method to solving the paradox but such an explanation by no means captures the entirety of the experience. Indeed, thought insertion is perhaps more of an experience than just a belief, delusional or not. More recently, evidence from both quantitative and qualitative research has emerged to support the notion that the boundaries between sensory experience and belief (at least in psychosis) are much more blurred than previously speculated. Thought insertion is of no exception—maybe its para doxical nature is best considered as a complex combination of both perception and belief formation which has lost the senses of agency and ownership of thought.

Agency and Ownership of Thought In order to fully appreciate the complexity of thought insertion, I will first discuss some of the current philosophical theories (and limited empirical evidence from neuropsychologi cal studies) of the phenomenon in question. It is widely acknowledged that “normal” or one’s own thoughts are immune to error through misidentification relative to the firstperson pronoun (the immunity principle): that is, “when a speaker uses the first-person pronoun (‘I’) to refer to him or herself, she cannot make a mistake about the person to whom he or she is referring”. This means that when Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion one uses “I” as in “ I think my thoughts”; they cannot possibly be referring to anyone else by saying “I.” It may seem obvious or even pedantic to stress the importance of the firstperson pronoun but the distinction of “I” is essential to thought insertion. For the person experiencing thought insertion, it is not just “ I don’t think my thoughts” but also “these thoughts that occur in my mind are not mine.” Many theorists agree that these two state Bents differentiate two important concepts, namely the senses of agency and ownership: agency refers to the sense that I am the one who is causing or generating an action, whereas ownership is defined by the sense that I am the one who is undergoing an exp rience (i.e. the experience belongs to me, voluntary or not; Gallagher 2000).

Thought insertion is considered to violate the immunity principle (and also the “Cartesian principle,” see Dillon 2013 ) because in thought insertion the decision of when to use “I” does not come naturally: in fact, some argue that the patient’s sense of agency has dimin shed but the sense of ownership is left intact. In other words, the individual misattribut es the agency to someone else while recognizing the thoughts are in their own mind and they are the “owner” or even “container” of the inserted, external thoughts. But the very act of misattributing agency implies volition and deliberation which borders on the realm of the “judgment” or agency and not just a “sense” which is often far more minimal and basic, sometimes even possessing sensory qualities: some patients report knowing the exact location and feeling the associated tactile Mensa son of external thoughts entering their head. The same expla nation may be applied to ownership: I argue that only because inserted thoughts occurs within a mind (sense of ownership), they do not always have to belong to the mind (p. 587) (judgment of ownership) in which they are found.

One may regard this as yet another paradox because the externality of inserted thoughts is only accessible through the first-person perspective. Given that when thoughts are ob Gained through introspection (“privileged access”) they will automatically integrate into one’s direct and taken-for-granted self-knowledge and hence are inseparable from the rest of one’s subjectivity, something like thought insertion becomes naturally implausible and such implausibility adds to the falsehood that is central to the current definition of a delusion. However, if one separates the process of thinking from the thoughts that are produced, the paradox of thought insertion may become a little less daunting. It is true that the “I” from the immunity principle acts as a prerequisite of thinking, but it can also act as a mere metaphor. The individual experiencing thought insertion adopts the position of “I” without endorsing the first-person nature of “I” due to the constraints of language and not personal choice. The personal choice is that it is not “I” who thinks these thoughts; because of the loss of “I,” it cannot possibly act as the causal agent of any thought in the first place. Therefore, I posit that in thought insertion, the only process left intact is the judgment of ownership and not the sense of ownership whereas both the sense and judgment of agency are severely damaged.

Thought insertion is considered to violate the immunity principle (and also the “Cartesian principle,” see Dillon 2013 ) because in thought insertion the decision of when to use “I” does not come naturally: in fact, some argue that the patient’s sense of agency has dimin shed but the sense of ownership is left intact. In other words, the individual misattribut es the agency to someone else while recognizing the thoughts are in their own mind and they are the “owner” or even “container” of the inserted, external thoughts. But the very act of misattributing agency implies volition and deliberation which borders on the realm of the “judgment” or agency and not just a “sense” which is often far more minimal and basic, sometimes even possessing sensory qualities: some patients report knowing the exact location and feeling the associated tactile Mensa son of external thoughts entering their head. The same expla nation may be applied to ownership: I argue that only because inserted thoughts occurs within a mind (sense of ownership), they do not always have to belong to the mind (p. 587) (judgment of ownership) in which they are found.

One may regard this as yet another paradox because the externality of inserted thoughts is only accessible through the first-person perspective. Given that when thoughts are ob Gained through introspection (“privileged access”) they will automatically integrate into one’s direct and taken-for-granted self-knowledge and hence are inseparable from the rest of one’s subjectivity, something like thought insertion becomes naturally implausible and such implausibility adds to the falsehood that is central to the current definition of a delusion. However, if one separates the process of thinking from the thoughts that are produced, the paradox of thought insertion may become a little less daunting. It is true that the “I” from the immunity principle acts as a prerequisite of thinking, but it can also act as a mere metaphor. The individual experiencing thought insertion adopts the position of “I” without endorsing the first-person nature of “I” due to the constraints of language and not personal choice. The personal choice is that it is not “I” who thinks these thoughts; because of the loss of “I,” it cannot possibly act as the causal agent of any thought in the first place. Therefore, I posit that in thought insertion, the only process left intact is the judgment of ownership and not the sense of ownership whereas both the sense and judgment of agency are severely damaged.

Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion Neuropsychological theories and empirical studies have also offered support for the dif ferentiation between agency and ownership; the most influential theory about the feeling of agency in intentional motor acts is perhaps the comparator model which, as some may argue, focuses on the minimize son of prediction error when comparing expected and outcome states of an action. If the error signal is large, the sense of agency is attributed externally as in self-initiated ac sons there is no or only minimal “mismatch” between what is the desired motor copse quince and what is the actual sensory feedback (however, this process might not be ap pliable to the sense of ownership: see Cato and Yasuda 2005). This model nicely explains phenomena such as passivity experiences or made actions (also a first-rank symptom of schizophrenia), but is the process of thinking also a motor act? Some theorists have in deed argued in favor of this notion, suggesting a “feeling of thinking” in terms of imagined action and inner (imagined) speech. However, even if the act of thinking does follow the same pattern as initiating (inner) actions, the act of as Bribing thinking to another agent cannot be fully accounted for by large error signals. For example, why would one attribute the agency of thought to that particular agent and not simply anything “non-self”? I suggest that this lack of explanation actually provides sup port for a duplex or two-factor account of thought insertion.

Thought Insertion as a Duplex Process The two-factor account of delusion formation is not a new concept, in particular its application to monothematic delusions such as the Capgras delusion (where the affected individual holds the belief that someone close to them has been replaced by an importer). However, for complex delusional sys ems often found in schizophrenia, it is extremely difficult to formulate a single unifying theory to capture the heterogeneity of delusions. The kind of two-factor account I am proposing here is in (p. 588) fact not about delusion formation—indeed, I do not consider thought insertion as entirely a delusion—but for thought insertion as a duplex process in Solving both sensory experiences and alterations in reasoning.

Phenomenological investigations have established striking similarities between what is sensory and what is a thought or belief in the subjectivity of psychotic experiences. The Husserlian phenomenological tradition, for example, requires the formal suspension (epoché) of prior taken-for-granted assumptions about the nature of a given experience under investigation (see Brooke et al. 2012: 14) which is inevitably at odds with the deli nations, formulations, and diagnostic judgments adopted by many psychiatrists even be fore speaking with the patient. Instead, by adopting an ontological neutrality, the patient’s first-person experience will come to the forefront and becomes the only central ty without the constraints of any predefined explanatory theory.

Orthodox psychiatric accounts about the seemingly clear-cut distinctions between a halloo citation and a delusion, for example, are “not what the textbooks describe” ( Jones and Shattell 2016: 769). Patients with psychosis feel their experiences are beyond that which Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion language and words can adequately express and as a result use many metaphors to try and convey what is in essence indescribable (but not incomprehensible). What the patient senses and what they think are almost one and the same, with patients reporting local zed thoughts in a particular part of their brain and also “soundless voices” or “a sense of being spoken to” rather than literally hearing a voice with acoustic qualities through their ears. With these theoretical and practical challenges to our “ordinary” understanding of psychopathology in mind, I posit that we should avoid the terminology “delusion of thought insertion” but instead simply call it “thought insertion” and when there is an as sociated delusional elaboration about the source of the inserted thoughts, “delusions in thought insertion.”

Of course, many may argue a change of one proposition (what does it matter whether it is delusion “of” thought insertion or delusion “in” thought insertion?) is merely a game of lexicon; furthermore, surely no one can actually receive external thoughts from without, it is physically and scientifically impossible so it must be a delusion no matter how much analysis we do! Still, how can anyone tell if an experience is an actual experience without being the experience? Just like no one can “literally” have thoughts that are not theirs, it is also a fact that no one can entirely take over another person’s perspective—to the ex periencing individual, however, the feeling of having external thoughts (and indeed, any other aspect of unusual phenomena) is extremely real and salient, perhaps even more re al than consensual reality due to the salience. Psychotic symptoms are not “real” by na Cure of external observation, yet they can be more literal and concrete than anything else to the person with psychosis, often with their whole experiential field dominated by a sin gle absorbing mental event whilst feeling detached from external reality. Therefore, the first stage of thought insertion (and related as Sects of psychosis) is likely a basic and generative sensory experience of “finding” or “feeling” thoughts entering one’s mind from external space.

This very sensation of “receiving” thoughts being forced into one’s mind is undoubtedly a highly salient and sometimes disturbing event, and any delusions that ensue are almost one’s natural need to explain the experience, one’s instinctive search for meaning. Yet such meaning cannot possibly be found by ordinary logic, given how extremely unusual the original experience is—hence “calling for” an equally extraordinary explanation as the second (p. 589) stage of thought insertion, often by delusional means. Even the essential indexical “I” of thinking only acts as a mere prerequisite of an assigned thinker, in order for the individual to formulate the sentence by which they try and describe the feeling to another. Using the first-person pronoun serves the purpose of communication by, rather than representation of, the agent possessing the inserted thoughts.

Let us consider the following three sentences: i) “This thought is not mine.” ii) “This thought is given to me/thought by person tenth.” iii) “This thought has been transmitted to me by tenth via a device in my brain.”

Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion The first sentence, however bizarre it may sound, is a statement based on an observation that a foreign thought has entered one’s subjective space because the thought is some how different from the background of the subject’s own thoughts (against personal val ues, interests and history, for example). This is to assume that one can readily different ate which thoughts belong to the self and which do not by the process of introspection, thus an ability to either self-ascribe them as one’s own or discard them as alien, which is again not usually a conscious effort as most would take their thinking processes with a certain “Fineness” and givenness. Hence I argue that it is the lack of “Fineness” and not always a delusional elaboration that “completes” the phenomenon of thought insertion.

The second sentence has a clear target and focuses on an external agent: person tenth. Now the subject has begun to try and explain where the thought comes from and after some logical or illogical inferential deliberation, has decided on person tenth. One could say the “level” of a delusion is more applicable to this second sentence. On the other hand, the third sentence may be considered “the most delusional” due to its sheer bizarreness and implausibility yet the experience behind this conclusion may not be any less real only be cause there is a stronger, more detailed elaboration.

The Role of Delusional Elaboration As detailed in the previous section, there are levels of how “delusional” a given explana son may be, regardless of the original generative experience. However, there is no way of telling whether the original experience is the same across individuals because the individ ual has to verbalize the experience in question first. If the only expression of such a bizarre and unsettling mental event is a delusional elaboration, no matter how remote from what realistically could happen, surely the elaboration itself carries meaning and significance for the individual. Assuming the experience of sensing or receiving external thoughts is indeed universal, the heterogeneity of the explanation that ensues serves as a reminder of how a delusion arises not only from alternations in brain function, but is also shaped if not defined by factors both unique to the individual and common to their social and cultural environment (Larøi et al. 2014; Luhrmann, Padmavati, Tharoor, and Osei 2015). For example, individuals in Western industrialized countries may be more likely to attribute thought insertion and related thought interference/alien control phenomena to “influencing machines” ( Hirjak and (p. 590) Fuchs 2010) whereas individuals in less Indus trially developed countries may attribute the same phenomena to witchcraft or demonic possession.

Nevertheless, all types of delusional elaboration for thought insertion have one common feature: they reflect the intrinsic need to search for meaning, as a human being, after an unexplainable yet highly perplexing and salient event. This search for meaning is spa rate from one’s rich imagination since psychosis, I argue, is not simply “imagined” be cause even the act of imagining is no longer a willed action, but an automatic process that has gained autonomy and spontaneity whilst losing privacy and first-person author Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion ty. The perceptualization of imagination significantly ac centuates the reality of internally generated events and the contrast between the “real Bess” of this externalization and the original perplexity caused by thought insertion is not something anyone could easily ignore. As a consequence, a (delusional) meaning is at ached to the external nature of the experience and this meaning is reinforced as long as the experience itself maintains externality. On the other hand, once a delusional elabora son has fully formed, it may become incorrigible and the individual may defend the deli signal meaning with anything they view as supporting evidence, hence reinforcing the ex placation through processes such memory consolidation.

Could it be that although the individual dissociative identity disorder not actively “choose” or even endorse the delusional ideation at first, the meaning it offers causes the individual to “latch onto” the same explanation because no matter how frightening the delusion is, at least it reconciles the even more frightening experience of thought insertion and provides some kind of “comfort” and sense of purpose at the same time? I think this is very much a probable reason for delusional conviction and maintenance—being able to identify the person or “the organization” sending the external thoughts could be much more preferable to living in constant uncertainty and perplexity, even if one may never be able to resolve the para doxical nature of thought insertion. The fear of losing one’s control over, and integrity of, one’s innermost thoughts is unspeakable, but once there is a target, an “enemy,” one could at least in theory redirect the fear to something more “real” than oneself at the cost of being unreal to everyone else in the external world.

Relationship with Auditory–Verbal Hallucina # sons I will now discuss how thought insertion is intertwined with another important aspect of psychosis, namely auditory–verbal hallucinations. As argued previously, I strongly believe that any experience—let it be a “normal” experience or a psychotic “symptom”—should not, and cannot be viewed in isolation from other experiences. This is not simply because experiences often tend to occur simultaneously, but also because, in order to achieve a “complete” phenomenology, we rely on the integration of all inputs from our current ex periential status. Even something very basic, such as a faint smell, can trigger a stream of memories or influence behavior, which in turn creates more experiences for the individ ual. Schizophrenia and its key positive symptoms discussed here are of no exception: al though they constitute a syndrome which is by no means independent from other syn domes in psychiatric nosology, each symptom is interrelated with another and together they weave the picture of the patient’s subjective experience. As Fletcher and Firth posit in their (p. 591) review, “how one experiences something at a basic sensory level is dependent on one’s knowledge of it (expressed in terms of its predictability)... each experience is affected by what one believes”. On this basis they continue to pro pose a Bayesian approach to explaining positive symptoms: “the extent to which one up Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion dates what one believes is affected by how that experience adds to it. This is, of course, the insight captured by Bayes’ theorem.”

The Bayesian framework posits that the processing of information depends on both prior or top-down knowledge, expectation, and experience in the face of current or bottom-up (often sensory) inputs which acts as an iterative process to minimize the discrepancy (i.e. prediction error) between them. Whilst the current essay will not dis cuss in detail this approach, it sheds some light on how belief and experience are interde pendent, rather than independent entities. For example, inserted thoughts could be traced back to one’s own thoughts but also linked with “soundless voices” (see below) and “true” auditory–verbal hallucinations. With thought insertion being the result of the loss of agency and ownership by one’s own thinking processes, these externalized thoughts subsequently re-enter the subject’s inner psychological space as alien without regaining the senses of agency and ownership. This re-entering process could be immedi ate, because thoughts cannot exist—at least not for very long—without a “container” or a thinker. An analogy of thought insertion would be that it is almost like an autoimmune disease of thought: produced from the mind, but because of a loss of vital properties (senses of agency and ownership) they are targeted (and attacked) as foreign invaders by the mind itself. This account is compatible with the theory that self-disturbances in schizo ophrenia act as a “generative disorder” or Minkowski’s “ trouble générater.”

Furthermore, “soundless voices” could be the in-between step or mediator between thought insertion and “true” auditory–verbal hallucinations; once the subject assigns a voice-like quality (whether it is actually audible or not) to their external thoughts, it push es the equilibrium equation toward a “hallucination” because if the subject already per caves thought insertion as “soundless voices,” it is only natural that other qualities (e.g. sound) normally associated with voices ensue conceptually and perhaps also perceptually. Therefore, I think that thought insertion and auditory–verbal hallucinations share an in terdependent relationship and the property of which is largely reliant on second-order judgments and attributions.

Furthermore, “soundless voices” could be the in-between step or mediator between thought insertion and “true” auditory–verbal hallucinations; once the subject assigns a voice-like quality (whether it is actually audible or not) to their external thoughts, it push es the equilibrium equation toward a “hallucination” because if the subject already per caves thought insertion as “soundless voices,” it is only natural that other qualities (e.g. sound) normally associated with voices ensue conceptually and perhaps also perceptually. Therefore, I think that thought insertion and auditory–verbal hallucinations share an in terdependent relationship and the property of which is largely reliant on second-order judgments and attributions.

The notion of “soundless voices,” albeit (again) paradoxical, is in fact nothing new; as summarized by Jones (2010 ), Bleuler described “vivid thoughts” which were called voices by his patients. However, there has been no investigation as to whether these very vivid thoughts are inserted or external thoughts. Auditory–verbal imagery can appear extreme ly real even in non-clinical populations, yet in these groups the agency and ownership of their verbal imagery remain intact and very few fail to distin gush verbal imagery from actual sensory perceptions. Nevertheless, in patients with schizophrenia the majority can also distinguish their voices from “real” auditory percep sons whilst believing in the “reality” of their voices. It may be that the pa taints are sentient to the realities of both their voices and external speech, but what is the key feature which sets apart the two equally prominent realities? Once again, I think the answer lies in the sense of “Fineness” which demarcates “my reality” from “external re laity.” It is ironic how the actual loss of “Fineness” (i.e. thought insertion and auditory– Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion verbal hallucinations) can create the patient’s reality (“my reality”) while all at the same time being experienced as if they come from without (“external reality”).

(p. 592) I stress again that these phenomena cannot be interpreted in isolation; it may seem confusing or paradoxical at first glance but in order to capture the complexity of their phenomenology, it is inevitable in my opinion that the components of the totality of experience relate to one another. I argue that “soundless voices” are not synonymous with, or equivalent to, thought insertion even though they share similarities in phenom nology; instead, thought insertion can act as a precursor to “soundless voices” via the process of secondary appraisal and elaboration. Assuming the definition of “true” audio ry–verbal hallucinations is theoretically and empirically valid (i.e. the subject really hears sound in auditory–verbal hallucinations), soundless voices, by definition, can become “true” auditory–verbal hallucinations if and when they gain acoustic qualities or audibili ty. By this definition (albeit problematic perhaps) soundless voices are primordial halluci nations (I have decided to avoid the term “pseudohallucinations” as I think it undermines the subjective reality of the experience) without sensory features and are not identical to thought insertion. They can be viewed as the intermediate state between thought infer son and “true” auditory–verbal hallucinations.

Conclusion In this article I have discussed the nature of thought insertion as a result of a loss of own reship and agency over thought, which often acts as a generative phenomenon to deli ion formation but which does not always qualify as a delusional belief by itself. I under stand it may be somewhat controversial to argue for a non-delusional account for extraor Binary mental events such as thought insertion, and I am aware some may argue that by “validating” the reality of thought insertion one might inadvertently intensify the deli signal conviction of an individual with psychosis and therefore impede recovery. However, I also believe that in order to fully comprehend thought insertion it is essential to view it from the perspective of the experience. If and when a delusion forms as a result of thought insertion, the delusion in question needs to be considered in conjunction with, but not instead of, the original generative experience of what is subjectively an event of finding external thoughts in one’s mental space (actual or metaphorical) and objectively an event of losing the senses of agency and ownership of these thoughts. I have also ar Cued that thought insertion needs to be considered in continuity with other symptoms of disrupted self-awareness on the schizophrenia spectrum, in particular auditory–verbal hallucinations with and without sound (“soundless voices”), which are in fact be transdi agnostic and reach beyond psychotic symptoms alone (although this calls for further analysis).

Taken together, however, my intention has never been to necessarily disentangle the paradoxes of thought insertion altogether but to offer a new angle to understanding them; one may have to admit that the very nature of thought insertion precludes a unify ing account and come to the conclusion that some paradoxes are fascinating simply be Thoughts without Thinkers: Agency, Ownership, and the Paradox of Thought Insertion cause they remain paradoxical no matter how deeply one attempts to analyze and solve their mystery. Thought insertion perhaps is one such mystery—but one must not be dis courage from continuing the endeavor, for it is these unsolvable questions that power one to further the Inquiry into the bizarre, intriguing, and surprisingly understandable human experience that we call psychosis. Although the aim of the phenomenological ap roach is never to completely explain the mechanisms underpinning unusual experiences like thought insertion, (p. 593) and a complete epoché may not always be possible, it can nevertheless assist with, and significantly contribute to, one’s efforts in constructing a more accurate and complete descriptive “picture” of psychopathological experiences. Perhaps the key implication for practice is that by shedding one’s own judgments and assumptions about reality or “normality,” the clinician would be able to listen more carefully to the expressions of the experiencing individual whose real ty is no less real than one’s own, which is of course the foundation of any strong theta pectic alliance. PAGE_BREAK The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsid red as a Disorder of Basic Self Louis A. Sass The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter offers an overview of the self-disorder or ipseity-disturbance model of schizo ophrenia, focusing on recent developments. According to this model, the foundational dis order in schizophrenia is a disturbance of minimal self or ipseity (derived from Apse, Latin for “self” or “itself”) that has three interrelated aspects: 1) hyperreflexivity and 2) dimin shed self-presence—together with a correlated 3) disturbance of “grip” or “hold” on the cognitive/perceptual world. The chapter focuses on recent theoretical work, together with some quasi-empirical and empirical research, that attempts to investigate the underlying nature of “self-disorder” in more depth through 1) offering theoretical clarification by considering self-disorder’s different, interlocking aspects as well its distinctive patio genetic forms or stages (primary versus secondary); 2) investigating self-disorder in a comparative context (e.g. compared with mania and severe depression, as well as with conditions involving prominent dissociative symptoms); and 3) discussing possible Lorre Bates on the neurobiological or neurocognitive plane.

Keywords: self-disorder, ipseity-disturbance, hyperreflexivity, diminished self-presence, primary versus secondary features of schizophrenia, depersonalization and derealization, neurobiological correlates of self-disorder # Introduction THE idea that a disorder of self might be at the core of schizophrenia or schizophreniaspectrum disorders is not a new hypothesis. In his classic General Psychopathology, first published in 1913, Karl Jasper (1963: 121f.) presents loss of the Cogito (of the “mine Bess” or “I-quality” of experience) as the most prominent source of that essential strange Bess that, in his view, actually defines the schizophrenic condition. Emil Kraepelin (1971: xvi), the father of modern psychiatric nosology, had already pointed to this feature of what he termed dementia praecox: “There is simply no ego there” ( Da ist ein Ich einfach night meh da ). In recent decades this notion has come once again to the fore, in the hy The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self pothesis of an ipseity-disturbance or disorder of basic, core, or minimal self—of the very experience of existing as a subject of experience or agent of one’s own actions.

Sass and Paras formulated this foundational disorder of core self or ipseity (de rived from Apse, Latin for “self” or “itself”) as having three interrelated aspects, and ar Cued that, taken together, these can account for all the major symptoms of schizophrenia: 1) hyperreflexivity and 2) diminished self-presence—together with a Lorre Bated 3) disturbance of “grip,” “hold,” or “grasp” on the cognitive/perceptual world. This ipseity-disturbance hypothesis is currently the most influential formulation in phenom nological psychopathology of schizophrenia—which, in turn, is the disorder that has re 1 caved the most attention by phenomenologically oriented specialists.

The ipseity-disturbance hypothesis has generated much scholarship and research. Of cru Dial importance are attempts to operationalize the concept and determine that it is, in deed, distinctive of persons in the schizophrenia spectrum. Below I will review this imper ant (p. 598) research, which mainly relies on a qualitatively rich, semi-structured inter view called the EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience, and has been described in detail elsewhere. The focus of this chapter will, however, be on theoretical work, together with some quasi-empirical research, that attempts to invest gate the underlying nature of “self-disorder” in more depth through 1) offering theoretic cal clarification by considering its different, interlocking aspects as well as what may be its distinctive pathogenetic forms or stages (primary versus secondary); 2) investigating it in a comparative context; and 3) discussing its possible correlates on the neurobiological or neurocognitive plane.

Self-disorder is a crucial but difficult concept, easily misunderstood or oversimplified. It requires not only empirical validation but also conceptual analysis and comparative invest Ligation in light of various analogies.

The Ipseity-Disturbance Model Three Aspects As noted, the ipseity-disturbance model of schizophrenia postulates that the fundamental disturbance or “ trouble générater ” of this illness or set of illnesses is a disturbance of “core” or “minimal” self—also known as “ipseity”. The term ipseity (synonymous with “core self,” “basic self,” or “minimal self”) refers to the crucial sense of self-sameness, of exist ing as a subject of experience or subject pole that is alive and at one with itself at any giv en moment, serving as a vital center point of subjective life. One person who suffered from schizophrenia, the writer Antonia Artaud, spoke of what he called “the essential ill mination” and this “phosphorescent point”—thereby referring to a vital and illuminating center-point that he equated with the “very substance of what is called the soul,” and de Ascribed as a prerequisite for avoiding “constant leakage of the normal level of The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self reality” (Artaud 1976: 169, 82; Artaud 1965: 20). The so-called autobiographical self or narrative continuity concerns a less foundational level (Gallagher 2011; Paras and Hen risen, this volume); and although disturbances at this level certainly occur in schizophre nia, they are less distinctive of schizophrenia (also found in dissociative identity disorder and borderline personality) and not likely to be strongly pathogenetic.

As noted, ipseity disturbance can be described in terms of three essential and interlock ing aspects.

1) Hyperreflexivity refers to an exaggerated self-consciousness, a coming-to-focal-orexplicit-awareness of processes and phenomena that would normally remain in the implicit background of experience, where they would normally be “inhabited” or ex perienced (tacitly) as part of oneself, but that now come to be experienced as having an alien quality (e.g. kinesthetic and proprioceptive bodily sensations; the verbalize sons inherent in our inner speech or thought) (Sass 1992; Sass et al. 2011; Henrik 2 sen et al 2015).

(p. 599) 2) Diminished self-presence (a.k.a. diminished self-affection) refers to a de line in the experienced sense of being a subject of awareness or agent of action—of existing, we might say, in the first-person perspective. This experience of one’s own presence as a conscious, embodied subject is so fundamental that any description risks sounding empty or tautological; yet its absence can be acutely felt: “I was sim ply there, only in that place, but without being present,” said one patient; another felt overwhelmed by “total emptiness... as if I ceased to ex ist”.

3) Disturbed grip or hold on the cognitive-perceptual world refers to disturbances of patio–temporal structuring of the experiential field, and of the clarity of such crucial experiential distinctions as perceived versus remembered versus imagined. It is as Fumed that such disturbances of grip or hold are grounded in abnormalities of the embodied, vital, experiencing self, which normally serves as a constituting and ori Denting background for experience of the world (Merleau-Monty 2012 re “hold” or “rise”; Sass 2004, 2014a).

Disorders of ipseity help to account for the “bizarre” and characteristically schizophrenic quality of various symptoms. An example would be the kinds of delusions that are typical of schizophrenia patients. These involve, in addition to altered cogito (an obvious self-re Bated feature), also certain alterations in the general look and feel of the perceptual field that constitute the delusional mood (a manifestation of disturbed grip), and a characters tic combination of certitude with inconsequentiality—of certitude re the delusion together with its irrelevance for real-world action (a manifestation of a certain quasi-solipsism as sociated with altered ipseity).

The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self Interdependence of the Three Aspects The three aspects are intimately interlinked, and should perhaps be understood more as aspects of a single whole than as separate but interacting processes. (It should be noted, however, that this aspects versus processes distinction may itself be exaggerated and somewhat misleading—subject as it is to the deficiencies of all attempts to capture sub jectivity in definite concepts largely deriving from other domains (see Fink 1995: 97f.; 3 Sass 2014b.)

Consider hyperreflexivity and diminished self-presence. On superficial consideration, these two phenomena might seem mutually contradictory, perhaps even psychologically incompatible—since one involves heightened self-consciousness, the other a form of di Finished self-awareness. But phenomenological consideration suggests that they are bet ter understood as not only compatible but even mutually complementary. Whereas hyper reflexivity emphasizes how something normally tacit becomes focal and explicit, dimin shed self-affection emphasizes a complementary or equiprimordial aspect of the very (p. 600) same process: the fact that what once was tacitly lived (e.g. kinesthetic sensations of lived body, inner speech as basis of thinking) is no longer being inhabited as a medium of taken-for-granted ipseity or basic selfhood.

A second form of interdependence is exemplified by the relationship between hyperreflex ivity-together-with-diminished-self-presence, on one hand, and, on the other, the concomi ant mutations in experience of the world termed disturbed grip. One might refer here to a “world-shaping relation” between a certain kind of lived body or corpora ally grounded subjectivity, and the experiential world that it constitutes.

Forms of ipseity characterized by hyperreflexivity and diminished self-presence would im ply, and in a sense constitute, a certain fragmentation, disorganization, and fading in the field of awareness. This is because distracting and normally irrelevant forms of self-exp rience (think of emerging kinesthetic sensations and inner speech), together with a di Finished sense of being a vital witnessing presence, would undermine the coherence, equilibrium, or sheer presence of one’s experience of the world—thereby accounting for the “constant leakage of the normal level of reality” to which Artaud referred in the quo Cation above.

Normal self-presence, with its balance of tacit and explicit, is, in fact, a necessary conj son for the experience of appetite, vital energy, and point of orientation—all crucial for al locating significance and associated salience. It is, after all, vital self-presence that nor ally grounds human motivation and organizes our experiential world in accord with needs and wishes, thereby giving objects their “affordances” —their deli chive importance as obstacles, tools, objects of desire, and the like. It is, one might say, a matter of “mattering”—of constituting a lived point of orientation and the correlated pat tern of meanings and hierarchies of significance that make for a coherent and significant world. Absent this vital self-presence, with the orientation and sense of reality it anchors, the entire framework for assigning salience is likely to be disrupted—for then there can be no clear sense of goal-directedness, or associated differentiation of means from goal, The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self no strong reason for certain objects to occupy the focus of awareness while others re cede, no reason for attention to wend outward toward the world rather than inward to ward hyperreflexive awareness of one’s own body or processes of thinking (Sass and Par nas 2003: 436).

The intimate relationship between these three aspects of ipseity disturbance illustrates the “intentional intertwining” or “mutual implication by meanings” that Husserl identified as the “essence of conscious life” (1977: 26). The three manifestations of ipseity disturb Dance likewise illustrate what Merleau-Monty (2012: 195) described as “internally linked” aspects of experience and behavior that “manifest a single typical structure” and stand in a relationship of “reciprocal expression.”

Primary and Secondary Forms of Anomalous Self-Experience I have pointed out the interdependence or even complementarity of the three aspects of ipseity disturbance. It is also important to consider a certain heterogeneity within each one of these aspects—in particular the distinction between primary and secondary fac tors. (This is a largely diachronic issue, having to do mainly with developments over time 4 —as (p. 601) opposed to the synchronic complementarity just discussed.) Some forms of ipseity disturbance may be more fundamental in a pathogenetic sense (and more neurobi logically determined) in the sense of occurring in a largely passive, automatic, and nonvolitional fashion. Others may be more consequential or compensatory, sometimes having a quasi-intentional flavor (albeit with neurobiological correlates). Later I shall describe how an understanding of this primary versus secondary distinction is relevant for a neu robiological account of schizophrenia.

Hyperreflexivity, for example, cannot be reduced to an exaggeration of “introspective” or “top-down” awareness of an essentially intellectual or volitional nature. The more general phenomenon of hyperreflexivity does include such processes, which are more active and might be termed “ reflective ” in nature, but more central to this concept (and likely to be more pathogenetically primary) is “ operative hyperreflexivity,” which in Solves processes that are generated automatically and passively experienced (re “opera Dive intentionality” versus “act intentionality,” see Merleau-Monty 2012: 18). This more primary, spontaneous “popping-out” of phenomena (e.g. kinesthetic sensations, fragments of inner speech) would engage attention, thereby motivating further, more intense, but pathogenetically secondary forms of attentive scrutiny, including reflective and defensive forms. These latter, secondary forms may well become quasi-automatized. They are likely to be counterproductive, exacerbating abnormal salience and associated fragmentation. Indeed they—like the primary factors—may well be necessary (but not sufficient) features for the development of a true schizophrenic syndrome.

Diminished self-presence—decline in the experienced sense of existing as a living and uni Died subject of awareness or agent of action —can also occur in both primary and secondary fashion, the latter involving defensive or even intentional or quasi-intentional processes. For an analogy from outside the schizophrenia The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self spectrum, consider the depersonalization characteristic of depersonalization disorder or post-traumatic stress disorder (post-traumatic stress disorder), which is almost universally understood as involve ing a defensive, and in this sense secondary, dissociative reaction to traumatic situations.

Depersonalization disorder patients complain of loss of emotions and of feelings of es trangement or detachment from their own mind and body as well as from the external world. This clinical picture—involving forms of diminished selfpresence generally assumed to be defensive in nature—resembles many of the self-atom lies experienced in schizophrenia, and may, in fact, offer a close par alley to the secondary dimension of many cases of schizophrenia. This is particularly Pele ant given recent recognition of the contributory etiological role, in schizophrenia, of ex Vernal stressors and sources of anxiety, including sexual or physical abuse, cultural disco cation, and social defeat, but also given the unsettling or traumatic experience of psy chosis itself, or of derived factors resulting from treatment settings (e.g. physical or far macological restraint, coercive inpatient treatments) —all of which could elicit dissociative reactions as one major form of defense.

(p. 602) Volitional (or largely volitional) instances of ipseity disturbance are afforded by the processes of intense introspectionist psychology—which is clearly a secondary form involving reflective hyperreflexivity (and which might also be termed hyperreflectivity)—and of Eastern meditation techniques expressly dedicated to appreci ting the illusory nature of the self (clearly a secondary form of diminished self-presence). Both processes are accompanied by alteration of one’s experience of external reality, in Eluding derealization with dimming of the emotional valence of the world. It is clear, then, that secondary forms of both hyperreflexivity and diminished self-presence and hyper reflexivity (i.e. “hyperre Election ”—in these cases outside schizophrenia) will cause or be accompanied by mutations not only in self-experience but also in a person’s grip on the world. (It is relevant here to consider the potential dangers of meditative practices, which can apparently be stressful and perhaps pathogenic for some vulnerable individuals (see Rocha 2014.)

Research on Anomalous Self-Experience Empirical Studies Most empirical investigation of the ipseity-disturbance model in recent years has em Cloyed the Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience (EASE), a se mi-structured interview format now translated into nine languages. The EASE is a quail tatively rich, fifty-seven-item interview that operationalizes and quantifies the ipseity-dis turbance model and is designed to detect sub-psychotic experiences. Many EASE items largely target one or another aspect of the (highly interdependent) ipseity disturbance. Thus Items 2. and 2. (referring to: Diminished sense of basic self, Diminished initio The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self Dive) imply diminished self-affection. Items 1. and 2. (Perceptualization of inner speech or thought, Hyperreflectivity) suggest hyperreflexivity of some kind. Items 1. and 2. (Inability to discriminate whether an experience is perception/fantasy/memory, Loss of common sense/perplexity) indicate disturbed “hold” or “grip” on the world. Still other EASE items (e.g. 4.1: Confusion with the other) more clearly imply two or more aspects.

There have been numerous studies using the EASE (or EASE-proxies). They are broadly supportive of the ipseity-disturbance hypothesis, showing that disturbance of ipseity or minimal self: • is far more prominent in schizophrenia than in psychotic disorders outside the schizo ophrenia spectrum, such as bipolar disorder with psychosis, or than in heterogeneous clinical samples; • aggregate selectively in those at risk for schizophrenia, either in genetic relatives or in prodromal individuals; • strongly predicts future onset of schizophrenia spectrum disorders in non-psychotic clinical populations and in those at high risk for psychosis; • characterizes schizophrenia spectrum disorders independently of the intensity or presence of frank psychotic symptoms, given that it occurs in both psychotic schizo phrenia spectrum disorders and schizotypal disorder; (p. 603) • increases in relation to symptomatic expression along the schizophrenia spectrum in a large genetic linkage sample; and • correlates with social dysfunction; and also with suicidality (more strongly than do positive symptoms)—thereby suggesting that concern about distorted and diminished forms of basic self-experience may contribute crucially to the particular kind of despair to which such patients are prone. (For supporting references re all the above, see Nel son et al. 2014a; Paras and Henriksen 2014; Paras, Raballo, Hardest et al. 2011.)

Anecdotal/Theoretical and Quasi-Empirical Studies I turn now to more theoretically oriented, exploratory studies that use the EASE by rely ing on quasi-empirical and sometimes anecdotal evidence. These have compared schizo phrenic self-alterations with subjective changes in psychotic depression and mania, but also in depersonalization disorder and heightened forms of introspection. Unlike the above-mentioned empirical work, the purpose here is less to establish the specificity of self-disturbance to schizophrenia, or its overall degree, than to clarify the internal strum Cure and pathogenetic role of the ipseity disturbance in the schizophrenia spectrum and elsewhere.

Schizophrenia and Effective Psychoses As already noted, the classic psychopathological distinction between schizophrenia and Effective psychosis is largely supported by EASE results—which show dramatically lower EASE scores in bipolar disorder and in non-schizophrenic psychotic syndromes than in The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self schizophrenia. Still, it is well known that Effective psychosis can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from schizophrenia, and that affect-disorder pa taints do sometimes manifest anomalies that are at least reminiscent of disturbances of ipseity or basic self—including (some would claim) apparent “first-rank symptoms” and other “mood-incongruent” features. It seems worthwhile, therefore, to look beyond the quantitative EASE findings cited above in order to consider whether certain kinds of self-disturbance might nevertheless be found in Effective Visor Hers.

In an exploratory study, accounts from the literature on phenomenological psychopatholo gy, together with published reports from patients with schizophrenia, mania, and psycho ic depression, were examined with respect to the five EASE dimensions: A) cognition and stream of consciousness, B) self-awareness and presence, C) bodily experiences, D) de marcation/transitivism, and E) existential reorientation. The methodology had a tripartite/dialectical structure: After considering more obvious differ Fences between schizophrenia and Effective disorders, some striking similarities or affine ties between the two conditions, including self anomalies, were noted. Finally, more sub tle but fundamental differences between schizophrenia and mood disorders were ex pored.

There are in fact some important, self-related anomalies, described in the EASE, that do seem to be reasonably common in mania or psychotic depression and appear in the pub Dished accounts. Thus the “feeling of having no feeling,” which is common in melancholia, may resemble EASE 2.4: Diminished presence. Manic feelings of mystic union may resemble EASE 4.5: Other transitivistic phenomena (e.g. “a pervasive feeling of being too open or transparent”). However, what were not observed (p. 604) were what seem to be certain more severe and disruptive dislocations of self or self/world boundaries: for example, 4.1: Confusion with the other, or solipsistic expert Fences like 5.3: Feeling as if the subject’s experiential field is only extant reality (e.g. “as if only objects in his visual field existed”). Clear instances of EASE 1.2: Loss of thought ip Deity—in which the patient feels that “certain thoughts [are] deprived of the tag of mine Bess”—appeared to be very rare if not absent in mania and psychotic depression. These findings support some little-known but interesting, earlier attempts to refine the “firstrank symptoms of schizophrenia” in more precise, even perhaps pathognomonic terms.

There are in fact some important, self-related anomalies, described in the EASE, that do seem to be reasonably common in mania or psychotic depression and appear in the pub Dished accounts. Thus the “feeling of having no feeling,” which is common in melancholia, may resemble EASE 2.4: Diminished presence. Manic feelings of mystic union may resemble EASE 4.5: Other transitivistic phenomena (e.g. “a pervasive feeling of being too open or transparent”). However, what were not observed (p. 604) were what seem to be certain more severe and disruptive dislocations of self or self/world boundaries: for example, 4.1: Confusion with the other, or solipsistic expert Fences like 5.3: Feeling as if the subject’s experiential field is only extant reality (e.g. “as if only objects in his visual field existed”). Clear instances of EASE 1.2: Loss of thought ip Deity—in which the patient feels that “certain thoughts [are] deprived of the tag of mine Bess”—appeared to be very rare if not absent in mania and psychotic depression. These findings support some little-known but interesting, earlier attempts to refine the “firstrank symptoms of schizophrenia” in more precise, even perhaps pathognomonic terms.

Schizophrenia, Depersonalization, and Introspectionism One may also wonder about affinities and differences between schizophrenia and certain specific conditions, psychopathological or otherwise, that, though outside the schizophre nia spectrum, might nevertheless demonstrate, in especially clear form, some key fea Cures of altered ipseity—namely, hyperreflexivity or diminished self-presence. Such stud ies are potentially relevant for the modeling of possible pathogenetic processes.

The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self One study focused on what is perhaps the purest instance of diminished self-affection in psychopathology: depersonalization disorder. A sister study focused on what would seem to be a pure instance of hyperreflexivity (or, at least, of hyper reflex tivity): the method and orientation of self-observation adopted by “introspectionist” psy chologists of the early twentieth century such as E. B. Kitchener (1912; Sass et al. 2013a). It should be noted that both these conditions would seem to involve largely secondary forms of ipseity anomaly. Whereas the self-reflection of introspectionism is volitionally ini sated and intentionally driven (a clear example of reflective hyperreflexivity or hyper re flectivity), the loss-of-self in depersonalization is generally assumed to involve, not opera Dive (primary) diminished self-presence, but a goal-directed (albeit not consciously initial ed) process of psychological defense.

These exploratory, quasi-empirical studies applied EASE categories either to published descriptions of depersonalization experiences (case reports, autobiographical accounts) or else to published introspectionist reports (experiments recorded by trained introspect Dive observers in psychological experiments). Although the presence of EASE-type expert Fences in these conditions indicates that ipseity disturbance is not entirely unique to schizo ophrenia, it also suggests that such disturbance might well constitute an important thou ble genérater in schizophrenia—given that these pure (albeit secondary) forms of hyper reflexivity or diminished self-presence do indeed generate experiences that mimic many of the characteristic experiences of schizophrenia.

Since these comparative studies do not allow for quantitative ratings of average levels of self-disturbance in these populations, they do not permit us to say whether self-disturb Dance is equally prominent as in schizophrenia. Results do show, however, that the major ty of EASE items were in fact easily found in both depersonalization disorder (72% of the items) and the introspection accounts (77%), thereby indicating considerable experiential overlap with the schizophrenia spectrum.

Some of the EASE items found in these two studies were not surprising: diminished selfpresence (e.g. EASE 2.1: Diminished sense of basic self) is, after all, an obvious aspect of depersonalization, while alienating self-reflection (e.g. EASE 1.7: Perceptualization of in ner speech or thought) might well be expected in the introspectionist stance. There was, however, also considerable crossover: thus, items indicating hyperreflexivity were com mon (p. 605) in depersonalization patients; items indicating diminished self-affection were common in introspectionist subjects. This crossover is consistent with the interdepen Fence of hyperreflexivity and diminished self-affection postulated by the ipseity-disturb Dance model.

Also noteworthy was the presence, in both groups, of disturbed cognitive or perceptual “hold” or “grip” on the world, as indicated by, for example, loss of common sense/perplex ity (EASE 2.12), disturbed time-experience (EASE 1.14), and attentional disturbances (EASE 1.12). All these findings are consistent, incidentally, with Sass’s earl er work on “madness and modernism”: namely, his demonstration that what he termed the “ hyperreflexivity ” and “ alienation ” of literary and artistic “modernism” (mainly in The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self works of the twentieth-century artistic and intellectual Savant-grade) parallel, in important respects, most of the key symptoms of schizophrenia. (“Alienation,” in his usage, is close ly akin to the depersonalization/derealization of diminished self-affection: Sass 2017: pref ace.)

It is important, however, to consider not just affinities but also discrepancies: viz. EASE items that were not endorsed in depersonalization or introspection. It is reasonable, after all, to expect significant differences between persons whose self-anomalies derive largely from such defensive or quasi-intentional factors (secondary factors), versus those whose abnormalities are likely to be more grounded in involuntary or operative ones (primary factors).

Some of the EASE items are quite subtle or may sometimes seem to overlap, rendering in terpretation somewhat difficult. Nevertheless, some patterns are suggested. It is note worthy that EASE items indicating feelings of passivity and alienation (e.g. 1.7: Perceptu alization of inner speech or thought, 2.2.2: Distorted first-person perspective involving “constant self-monitoring”) and alienation or fading of self and world (2.4: Diminished presence) generally seemed prominent in depersonalization and introspection as well as in schizophrenia (affinities). However, items more suggestive of severe dislocation, ero ion, or dissolution of first-person perspective (such that self and other can seem fused or confused) tended to be absent from either depersonalization or introspection (discrepant ices). These latter (the discrepancies) included, for example, EASE 2.9: Identity confu ion, 3.9: Mimetic experience, 4.2: Confusion with one’s secular image, also 1.16: Dis cordance between intended expression and the expressed.

The affinities—experiences found in depersonalization and introspection as well as schizophrenia—might be considered to be consistent with heightening or recognizing as Sects or features of the normal self or subject—which does, after all, have its paradoxical aspects. (The philosopher Sartre, e.g. describes normal subjectivity as a “nothingness” that nevertheless experiences itself as distinct from its objects.) By contrast, the latter, discrepancy experiences (found only in schizophrenia) may suggest collapse of more “transcendental” or constituting structures of experience: for example, of the very polar ty of subject versus object/other, or of the most foundational sense of one’s distinctness as a subject of experience.

Two Additional Empirical Studies A Panic Disorder Study The findings from a recent empirical study of panic disorder patients largely corroborate those from the studies of introspection and depersonalization just discussed—and in this case based on actual EASE interviewing. In the panic disorder study, trained interviewers carried out (p. 606) EASE interviews with forty-seven hospitalized panic disorder patients and forty-seven healthy controls. A key purpose was to clarify what might—or might not—be specific to the schizophrenia spec rum domain. The study showed that anomalous self-experiences (as defined in the EASE)

The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self can indeed be prevalent in panic disorder, including disturbances of self-awareness, body experience, and thought. The distribution of EASE items and sub-items in the panic Visor der sample was heterogeneous, however.

The panic disorder sample was found to have a much higher EASE scores than those found in previous EASE studies of bipolar psychosis or of groupings of miscellaneous nonschizophrenia spectrum mental disorders, but lower than scores found in previous EASE studies of schizophrenia spectrum patients. Panic disorder patients showed many com mon forms of derealization and depersonalization—perhaps involving more “secondary” and defensive psychological processes. They tended however to lack indicators suggest ing truly profound distortion of the normal “transcendental” conditions of consciousness (i.e. as concerning the very constitution of subjective life or “basic self”) that might con statute a more “primary” factor in schizophrenia. In this sense these subjects appear Mimi lar to those with depersonalization disorder or engaged in introspection. Overall, the find Dings support the ipseity-disturbance or basic self-disturbance model of schizophrenia, while also indicating the need for careful phenomenological exploration of self-anomalies in order to distinguish certain “psychotic-like phenomena” found in a variety of diagnoses (typically involving various forms of depersonalization and derealization) from those that seem characteristic of true psychotic or schizophrenic conditions.

An Empirical Study of the Effects of Introspection The potential effects of secondary forms of alienating self-consciousness ( reflective hyperreflexivity) were directly demonstrated in a ground-breaking experimental study from the 1970s. Hunt and Chefurka subjected healthy people to a state of isolation and inactivity and, using methods modeled on classical introspectionism, directed them to attend to their “immediate subjective state,” thereby inducing a reflective form of hyperreflexivity. Resulting experiences closely resembled psychedelic phenomena as well as schizophrenic symptoms: subjects reported sensory hypersensitive ty, depersonalization and derealization, perceptual anomalies with “felt portentousness,” feeling watched by a room that seemed somehow alive, aloneness and detachment, and ideas of reference, together with “mental daze” involving “cognitive disorganization” or “blank empty awareness.” More recently, Petitmengin et al (2009 ) showed that a reflex Dive focus on normally pre-reflective levels of awareness is associated with diminished agency and body ownership, permeable ego boundaries, and ineffability.

An Empirical Study of the Effects of Introspection The potential effects of secondary forms of alienating self-consciousness ( reflective hyperreflexivity) were directly demonstrated in a ground-breaking experimental study from the 1970s. Hunt and Chefurka subjected healthy people to a state of isolation and inactivity and, using methods modeled on classical introspectionism, directed them to attend to their “immediate subjective state,” thereby inducing a reflective form of hyperreflexivity. Resulting experiences closely resembled psychedelic phenomena as well as schizophrenic symptoms: subjects reported sensory hypersensitive ty, depersonalization and derealization, perceptual anomalies with “felt portentousness,” feeling watched by a room that seemed somehow alive, aloneness and detachment, and ideas of reference, together with “mental daze” involving “cognitive disorganization” or “blank empty awareness.” More recently, Petitmengin et al (2009 ) showed that a reflex Dive focus on normally pre-reflective levels of awareness is associated with diminished agency and body ownership, permeable ego boundaries, and ineffability.

Such findings have implications for the conceptualization of psychological forms of treat Bent, implications consistent with the self-disorder model of schizophrenia ( Škodlar et al. 2013): it suggests, in particular, 1) the possible danger of encouraging forms of alienating self-reflection that might have the iatrogenic effect of exacerbating hyperreflexivity and alienation (some variants of Cognitive Behavior Therapy (cognitive behavioral therapy) or Acceptance and Com Fitment Therapy (acceptance and commitment therapy) treatment may run this risk), and also 2) the potentially reinte grative and curative effects of encouraging engagement with practical action and in nonthreatening forms of social interaction.

The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self (p. 607) Summary We see, then, that schizophrenic self-disorder is a complex phenomenon that requires careful theoretical analysis as well as empirical investigation and comparative study. Overall, the essential disturbances of normal ipseity captured by EASE items seem to be more characteristic of schizophrenia than of most other abnormal conditions. They are not, however, unique to schizophrenia, given that some aspects can occur in severe affect Dive disorder and can even be quite prominent also in depersonalization disorder and the introspectionist stance—as well as in an anxiety disorder sample of panic disorder pa taints; also there are striking analogues from modernist and postmodernist literary and artistic production—cultural domains in which acute self-consciousness and alienation play a central role. We have also seen, however, that the most severe disruptions of self may be more rare or even absent outside schizophrenia.

Neither the concept of ipseity nor that of ipseity disturbance seems, then, to be a purely unitary concept. Ipseity disturbance is neither a simple quantifiable dimension nor some mysterious x-factor that cannot be further analyzed. Ipseity disturbance does have a holistic, gestalt-like quality; also, it may come in degrees. Yet it is also possible, indeed necessary, to consider its structure or component aspects, especially if one seeks to ex lore its variability and pathogenesis, and also its neural correlates—which is the topic to which we now turn.

Neurocognitive Dimensions Historical Background and Theoretical Concerns It is important to recognize that the ipseity-disturbance model, and perhaps especially the notion of hyperreflexivity, seems to conflict with the most dominant, traditional, overall ways of conceptualizing neurobiological factors in severe psychopathology.

Madness has, since ancient times, largely been conceived as a decline of higher or more rational faculties of mind, including abstraction and self-consciousness, often with con comitant emergence of more primitive, concretistic, or Dionysian/passionate (instinctdominated) forms of subjective life. This is true of the biological accounts that came into prominence in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and have remained highly in fluential ever since—for example, in the work of Emil Kraepelin on dementia praecox, of Kurt Goldstein on concreteness or loss of the “abstract attitude,” of Freud on regression to “primary process” thinking, and also in the somewhat earlier writings of Hughlings Jackson and Maudsley (Sass 1992: appendix).

Hughlings Jackson, who was inspired by the evolutionist of his time, saw mental illness es, both neurologic and psychiatric, as consequences of a disintegration of the higher mental processes involving volition, control, self-consciousness, and reasoning, together with an associated release of impulsive and instinct-driven behavior patterns or automa isms emerging from “lower” or more primitive and emotion-dominated levels of the ner The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self vouch system. Maudsley, perhaps the most important British psychiatrist of his time, wrote in 1874 of the surprising “mindlessness” that, he believed, exists even “at the back of what looks like (p. 608) very partial mental disorder” ( Barrios 1985; Clark 1981: 284–286; Sass 1992: appendix). Such visions—emphasizing deficit and/or primitivity—hardly seem consistent with the forms of hyperconsciousness, derealization, Revitalization, or selfalienation emphasized in the ipseity-disturbance model.

A second feature of the traditional reductionistic version of the neurobiological model is the assumption of unidirectional causality and an associated denial or neglect of the pathogenetic relevance of psychological factors. By the end of the nineteenth century this had become practically an official dogma: “It is not our business, it is not in our power,” wrote Maudsley, “to explain psychologically the origin and nature of any of [the] depraved instincts” manifested in typical cases of insanity. The alienist’s purpose was only to ob serve and classify, since the “explanation, when it comes, will come not from the mental, but from the physical side” ( Clark 1981: 271). Such a view tends to deny the importance of secondary factors involving defensive processes motivated by particular subjective ex periences, especially those that might sometimes involve volitional or semi-volitional re actions on the patient’s part.

The neurobiological abnormalities found in schizophrenia in recent decades have fre quently been interpreted in accord with these traditional reductionistic models—that is, as constituting the underlying neural substrate or source of the lowered mental level or diminished higher-level control (suggestive of dementia and sometimes regression) that is ascribed to these conditions. However, careful consideration of the basic self-disturb Dances described above might inspire one to doubt such views, and to search for a tho retinal account more congruent with the clinical realities recognized in phenomenological psychopathology. Interestingly, the most recent neurocognitive models of schizophrenia are, in fact, quite consistent with the ipseity-disorder view—and with the neurocognitive accounts endorsed or suggested in Sass’s phenomenological account (1992: appendix; 2017: appendix).

Recent Neurocognitive Models Consider, for example, “salience dysregulation,” the notion that key schizophrenic sump toms involve abnormalities, both neural and psychological, in how particular stimuli emerge into focal awareness. The limbic-system overactivity this involves (which largely implicates hippocampal abnormalities) was associated, not long ago, with a supposed dominance of “primitive” mental tendencies and memories (Andreasen 1986: 39, 43; 1988: 1382), or with “overwhelming instinctual forces” and a loss (reminiscent of Kurt Goldstein’s views) of the capacities for abstraction, logical reasoning, and independent judgment (Weinberger 1987: 661–666; Goldberg et al. 1987: 1013). Now, however, it tends to be related—far more plausibly—to forms of hyperconsciousness that can result in a fragmented (and I would say, quasi-surrealist) vision of external reality and a focal awareness of kinesthetic and proprioceptive sensations that implies an alienated expert The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self Once of the one’s own lived body ( Nelson et al. 2014c; Sass 1990; Sass 2017: appendix; Sass and Borda 2015).

Another neurocognitive trend found in schizophrenia—the absence of normal prefrontal dominance previously termed “hypofrontality”—was previously associated with a general loss of higher cognitive capacities: with a “dementia of the prefrontal type” akin to Goldstein’s concept of “concreteness” or loss of the abstract attitude ( Goldberg et al. 1987: 1013). More recent models speak, however, of failure to suppress activation of the Default-Mode Network (p. 609) (DMN). This suggests that such absence of prefrontal, ex ecutive dominance actually subserves forms of consciousness that are free-floating and abstract, hypothetical rather than literal, and introspective rather than practical in nature —all quite consistent with the ipseity-disturbance model and the notion of hyperreflexivi ty in particular.

Similar points could be made about the “source-monitoring” abnormalities that seem to underlie first-rank symptoms in schizophrenia: rather than conceiving these abnormal ties as indicating decline of the capacity for “metarepresentation,” as has been suggested, one may view them as involving hyperreflexive tendencies to take one’s own lived body as an object of awareness, and thus to fail to inhabit the body in the tacit and automatic manner that is required for normal forms of real-world oriented activity.

Still another approach to schizophrenia focuses on abnormalities of brain laterality. Here too, much of the evidence does not, in fact, favor the traditional irrationalist or reduction istic models previously proffered, but points rather to the diminished capacity for sponta nous and context-bound forms of cognition (often accompanied by a compensatory re Fiance on inappropriately deliberate or rational faculties) that occurs with a relative de line of right-hemisphere activation or dominance.

We see, then, that recent neurobiological research on schizophrenia and current models does not implicate the decline of intelligence, rationality, or self-conscious awareness—or the regression or instinct-domination—assumed by many traditional theories. The evi Fence is actually more compatible with theoretical models postulating dysfunctional hy per-awareness, a loss of normal spontaneity or embeddedness, or even, at times, a kind of hypertrophied rationality divorced from lived body and practical context.

The key to explaining schizophrenia does not, however, seem likely to be contained in any single neurocognitive theory. Indeed it is probable that schizophrenia is a heterogeneous illness: not a disease entity in which all cases have the same etiology, but more of a final common pathway (itself somewhat heterogeneous) to which a variety of different causal factors—or combinations of factors—may lead.

The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self Primary and Secondary Factors Of particular importance for neurocognitive modeling of schizophrenic pathogenesis is the distinction between “primary” versus “secondary” factors. One needs to ask, for ex ample, whether certain forms of hyperreflexivity or diminished self-presence or disturbed “grip,” for instance, might have a more primary, basic, perhaps affliction-like quality, and be prominent from early in life, whereas other forms—more reactive, reflective, or even quasi-volitional in nature—might develop later as sequelae or defensive reactions to these more foundational problems (Sass 2017: appendix).

It is noteworthy that most research on the above-mentioned euro-level correlates has concerned patients whose disorder is well established, and shows mainly that the neural correlates accompany the psychological trends or symptoms in question. This leaves open the possibility that the psychological trends just discussed—such as hyper-scrutiny (Basso sated with salience dysregulation) or withdrawal from an action-orientation (associated with abnormal default-mode or DMN activation)—could be occurring in a largely “sec ondary” (p. 610) way, perhaps as a consequence of, or defensive reaction to, some more 5 basic disruption of experiential life. There is, in any case, a related but alternative hy pothesis that can perhaps claim stronger evidence in support of its potentially “primary” pathogenetic status. This is the notion of disturbed “perceptual integration,” which has been found in schizophrenia patients and also (to a milder degree) in children, still Bela Lively normal, who are at high risk for, or will later develop, schizophrenia spectrum dis orders.

Perceptual integration refers to the synthesizing of information from different sense modalities, such as visual and auditory, and perhaps especially between interoceptive and exteroceptive processes, such as kinesthesia/proprioception and visual perception. Dis turbance of perceptual integration (perceptual dys-integration, we might call it) would be consistent with the presence of “basic symptoms”—the subtle but persistent disruptions of perceptual, motoric, Effective, and cognitive life found in people prone to schizophre nia, and which can be interpreted as involving subtle disturbances of self-experience (KlosterköOtter et al. 2001; Schultz-Utter 2009 ). Disruption of this integration may be re Bated to the disturbed “connectivity” of various brain networks, which is certainly charac 6 teristic of schizophrenia.

It is not difficult to conceptualize why successful perceptual integration would be crucial in the development of normal minimal or basic self-experience ( ipseity ): such integration contributes not only to the unity of object perception but also to the (closely related) sense of being grounded as a living corporeal presence or organizing viewpoint on the world. Indeed, the neural circuitry of perceptual integration might well constitute, in large measure, the neural foundation of basic self-experience and the capacity to differed 7 sate self from other.

The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self It seems plausible, then, that perceptual dys-integration might underlie foundational, pri Cary, or “operative” forms of disruptive hyperreflexivity, diminished self-presence, and disturbed cognitive/perceptual “grip” on the world, together with associated “basic sump toms”. Other forms, more reactive or defensive in nature, might come into prominence somewhat later in the causal sequence. The forms of hyperreflexivity or diminished self-presence associated, for instance, with with drawl from practical activity, hypervigilance, or diminished spontaneity might be largely reactive or defensive, more associated with shifting attitudes or orientations to expert Once, and perhaps more variable in nature (albeit also grounded in more intrinsic neu rocognitive abnormalities mentioned above). It seems obvious, after all, that each of the psychological orientations (p. 611) associated with the above-mentioned specific hypothe ses (withdrawal, hypervigilance, diminished spontaneity) could at least be exacerbated or diminished in accord with willful, quasi-intentional, or defensive actions or attitudinal ori entations on the part of the subject; in this sense they are best conceived not as pure de Sect states but as existing in a gray zone between act and affliction.

One or more of these latter, perhaps secondary factors (which could themselves be potent sally overlapping) might be necessary for the development of schizophrenia, but perhaps not sufficient in the absence of a more fundamental disturbance of basic integration and selfhood. It should be noted, however, that although perceptual dys-integration may well be a necessary factor, it alone also seems unlikely to provide a sufficient condition—given that it can be found in other conditions and does not always lead to schizophrenia. Some combination of factors—but perhaps not always the same balance of factors—is probably required for that (admittedly) rather heterogeneous “final common pathway” that we term “schizophrenia.”

Primary factors relevant to self-disturbance might well be more decisive in so-called “poor premorbid” patients or cases with early or “insidious” onset, who are often dome anted by negative symptoms and “nonparanoid” features. Secondary factors might be more crucial for cases with more acute onset and better premorbid functioning, and with more prominent positive and perhaps especially dissociation-like symptoms, as well as for acute exacerbation later in the course of illness. (For discussion of two pathways to psy chosis, one more endogenous, the other trauma-driven, see Kilcommons and Morrison 2005.)

It is well known that symptoms of schizophrenia can fluctuate dramatically, sometimes in association with the patient’s personal attitude or orientation but at other times having a more random quality (see Matthysse et al. 1999 re dialipsis). It is difficult to square such variability with many current cognitive models of schizophrenia, whether modular or molar.

One advantage of the ipseity-disturbance hypothesis is that it is more compatible with this fluctuating nature of schizophrenia symptoms, across time and situation. “Self-affect son” is akin to an affect-state in which the sense of vital existence may wax or wane in conjunction with one’s prevailing perspective, orientation, or attitude toward the world.

The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self The diverse forms of self-consciousness captured by “hyperreflexivity” would be similarly variable, given they involve forms of attention, which obviously shift and transform. The self is not, after all, something one just happens to be aware of: its existence is inextrica ble from processes of self-awareness (implicit and otherwise) by which it is constituted. It is understandable, then, that ipseity might be unstable in schizophrenia, at times relative ly stable but at other times turning “wobbly” in the words of one patient, whose “vantage point,” what she called the “solid center from which one experiences reality,” would be come “fuzzy” at times, “break[ing] up like a bad radio signal” or eroding “like a sand cas tle... sliding away in the receding surf”. A fundamental or operative vulner ability would exist in tight interaction with more secondary processes that are more Kari able over time.

There is need for research that explores the variable nature of various neurocognitive and neurobiological trends. Such research would manipulate and investigate the effects of changing mental orientation or stance (e.g. of adopting a withdrawn/introspective versus practical focus, of scrutiny versus a spontaneous orientation) in both schizophrenic and normal subjects. The purpose would be to determine the extent to which various phenom ena—including the anomalous experiences described in the EASE, as well as (p. 612) such cognitive abnormalities as salience dysregulation, perceptual fragmentation, mind-wan Bering, and disturbed sense of agency (or their milder equivalents), together, in some studies, with their neural correlates —might alter in accord with such changes. Here it would be useful to supplement the EASE, which focuses on self-experience, with semistructured interview studies that concern alterations of world -experience—including mu Cations of time, space, other persons, and general atmosphere. These latter alterations are targeted in the recently published, sister interview format called the EAWE: Examine son of Anomalous World Experience ( Sass, Pinkos, Škodlar et al. 2017; Sass, Pinkos, and Fuchs 2017; see also Sass and Pinkos 2013b; Sass 2014a).

It is entirely plausible that such alterations would occur. As noted above, past studies al ready show that mere adoption of an intensely introspective/detached orientation toward experience, on the part of normal subjects, can bring about certain “psychedelic” or psy chaotic-like forms of perceptual experience akin to what occurs in schizophrenia. It would be surprising if euro-level abnormalities were not also produced, at least to some degree, by shifting attitudes or orientations on the subject’s part. In this respect such abnormal ties may be subject to (though not entirely the product of) varying, defensive, or even in tentional or quasi-intentional factors—of the kind that are inherent in depersonalization defenses, introspectionism, and perhaps forms of meditative practice.

It is entirely plausible that such alterations would occur. As noted above, past studies al ready show that mere adoption of an intensely introspective/detached orientation toward experience, on the part of normal subjects, can bring about certain “psychedelic” or psy chaotic-like forms of perceptual experience akin to what occurs in schizophrenia. It would be surprising if euro-level abnormalities were not also produced, at least to some degree, by shifting attitudes or orientations on the subject’s part. In this respect such abnormal ties may be subject to (though not entirely the product of) varying, defensive, or even in tentional or quasi-intentional factors—of the kind that are inherent in depersonalization defenses, introspectionism, and perhaps forms of meditative practice.

The research I am recommending should not, of course, dichotomize act versus affliction, but rather recognize the ambiguous, interwoven nature of actual psychological life in both pathological and normal contexts. Such research could help to clarify the complex syntheses of primary and secondary factors in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Its po The Life-World of Persons with SchizophreniaConsidered as a Disorder of Basic Self tential relevance for devising treatments to alleviate abnormal tendencies could be con siderable.

Concluding Remark This proliferation of theoretical possibilities may seem excessive to some devotes of the scientific principle of Occam’s razor. But Occam’s razor favors the simplest formulation that is adequate to the phenomena to be explained. An adequate model of schizophrenia may need to postulate shared disturbances of core-self experience that nevertheless fol low a variety of distinct pathways, and occur in various forms. Such a model is preferable to uni-dimensional alternatives, given its ability to account for the distinctive yet highly diverse and varying types of experiential and neurocognitive abnormalities that have been documented in research on schizophrenia. It may be that just this sort of theoretical labor is what is required if we hope to emerge from the relative stagnation—now widely recognized —into which research on schizophrenia has fallen. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK 3 ( ) The difficulty of talking of such issues is well recognized by Eugene Fink, Husserl’s closest associate, who warned against “seduction by mundane meanings” (1995: 97f.). In Fink’s view, every attempt to speak of “the transcendental” necessarily encounters con flit and contradiction. This is due to the gap between the intended, transcendental sense of words as used in phenomenology (which aims at subjectivity itself) and the mundane or natural sense, grounded in the “natural attitude,” whence they derive their original sense.

4 ( ) The synchronic/diachronic distinction largely corresponds with Husserl’s distinction between static and genetic phenomenology (the latter including what he termed “motive tonal” issues).

5 ( ) We should not, however, rule out a more causally fundamental status, which is entirely possible. Some of these psychological tendencies and neural correlates discussed above sometimes do occur independently of, and prior to, psychotic episodes; each could involve some inborn or other basic propensity. On the close inter twining of defenses with temperamental or cognitive dispositions, see Shapiro, Neurotic Styles.

6 ( ) This dysconnectivity may involve abnormalities in medial/lateral prefrontal cortex, or perhaps insular cortex—which plays an important role in integrating interoceptive and exteroceptive perceptual processes as well as in vital emotions and desires that affect the lived body and sense of core self.

7 ( ) In one study, participants subjected to “multisensory conflict” (conflicting visual and somatosensory input) had a schizophrenia like experience, feeling “as if a virtual body seen in front of them was their own body and mislocaliz[ing] themselves toward the virtual body, to a position outside their bodily bor Hers.”

Louis A. Sass Department of Clinical Psychology, Rutgers University The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders # The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders Thomas Fuchs The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Nov 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter analyzes mood disorders as disorders of implicit and explicit temporality. First, depression is conceived (a) as a desynchronization from intersubjective time, (b) as an inhibition of Donation or basic drive. The inhibition results in a disturbance of cyclical bodily functions and in a retardation of lived time, manifested both in a loss of the future as a space of possibilities, and in a predominance of the past in the form of accumulated guilt. Depressive delusions may then be described as beliefs which result from the free ing of self-temporalization and which resist an intersubjective alignment of perspectives. Further considerations are given to chronic depression and mania, the latter being de Ascribed as the opposite type of desynchronization as compared to depression, namely an acceleration and partial decoupling of the inner time from the world time. Finally, copse quinces for a “resynchronizing therapy” are outlined.

Keywords: depression, mania, temporality, contemporality, Donation, lived body, desynchronization, delusion, re synchronization # Introduction PHENOMENOLOGICAL psychopathology has a long tradition of describing and analyzing the subjective experience of Effective disorders, in particular, melancholic depression. These analyses have mostly focused on dimensions such temporality, spatiality, embody Bent, personality, or identity. However, the dimension of time has always played a particular role, pointing to the close connection of mood disorders with the temporality of existence. This chapter is based on the assumption that disturbances of temporal exp rience may indeed be considered the foundational disturbances of Effective disorders, even if they equally manifest themselves in the patient’s bodily, spatial, and intersubjec Dive experience.

The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders The connection between affectivity and temporality has already been discussed in ‘The Experience of Time and its Disorders’ ( Fuchs, this volume, chapter 49). The major results may be summarized as follows: • On the most basic level, the temporal continuity of conscious experience is stab Dished by the linking of retention, presentation, and protection (cf. Husserl’s analysis of internal time-consciousness, Husserl 1969). However, lived time is also constituted by the dynamics of Donation —that means drive, striving, urge, or impulse—which are gen rally directed toward the future (e.g. toward the fulfillment of thirst, hunger, sexual desire, or other goals of drives). Donation is also influenced by feelings of bodily vital ty such as freshness, vigor, or agitation on the one hand, and tiredness, exhaustion, or apathy on the other hand. These basic bodily states are equally connected to variations of lived time (as visible, e.g. in agitation versus lethargy).

• Mood states and existential feelings do not only permeate and color the experiential field, but always have a temporal dimension as well. Thus, boredom results from (p. 618) a mismatch between drive and interest on the one hand, and lack ing possibilities for attention and action on the other. As is well known, boredom makes time-conscious or explicit as a sluggish flow. Furthermore, melancholy or nos talgia are moods related to a painfully missed past, whereas longing is related to a de sired future. On the contrary, in diffuse anxiety the future is felt as an impending dan ger or doom. Finally, elation and euphoria are accompanied by an acceleration, dys phobia, and depression by a retardation of lived time.

• Emotions are linked to temporality as well. Thus, desire, hope, or fear are directed toward an anticipated future; in surprise, fright, or shame the present is experienced in an intrusive way, whereas sadness, grief, or guilt feelings are bound to the past.

Since emotions are always related to the self and its maintenance, they manifest the general structure of “concern” ( Forge ), to use Heidegger’s term, as the fundamental condition of human existence in time. Moreover, from an embodied point of view, emotions (from the Latin e-mover, “to move out ward”) are kinetic, dynamic forces, that means motivations for movement and action that project the person toward the world and the future.

• Finally, the intersubjective dimension of affectivity may also be conceived in terms of temporality, namely as attunement or synchronization and “detuning” or desynchro nization. On the one hand, emotions and mood states may be shared with others in in tersubjective presence or contemporality (Minkowski 1933/1970; Fuchs 2013a). This is the case in pre-reflective intercorporeality, bodily resonance, empathy, or in the flow of joint action, usually accompanied by a basic feeling of being attuned and connected with others. On the other hand, acceleration of one’s own time as in hypo-manic or manic agitation leads to a desynchronization from others, expressed in feelings of im patience, irritation, or aggression. On the contrary, grief or unresolved guilt feelings are equivalent to a partial desynchroniziation in the sense of retardation or ream The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders Fence. This culminates in depression as a loss of basic contemporality, experienced as a feeling of disconnectedness, exclusion, and isolation from others.

As can be seen, a phenomenological approach to affectivity regards Donation, mood, xis tential feelings, and emotions as a fundamental dimension of existence, which crucially influences the experience of a person’s present, past, and future as well as intersubjec Dive temporality. This becomes particularly obvious in mood disorders such as depression and mania.

The Phenomenology of Depression Focusing on severe or melancholic depression, I will give a two-level account which de scribes it on the one hand as the result of an intersubjective desynchronization, and on a deeper level as a disturbance of Donation or “vital inhibition.”

Vulnerability and Premorbid Situation Phenomenological psychopathology has not only conceptualized depression itself as a dis turbance of lived time—I only mention the most significant contributions by von Gebsattel (p. 619) 1928; Minkowski 1933/1970; Straps 1947; Binswanger 1960; Tellenbach 1980; Tatossian 1983; Fuchs 2001, 2013a; Gallagher 2012; Stanghellini 2004; and Stanghellini et al. 2017. Phenomenology has also elaborated the peculiar personality structure and form of existence which creates a disposition to the illness. The most important contribu son consists without doubt in Tellenbach’s concept of the “Melancholic Type” ( Types Melancholics ) which is marked by traits such as conscientiousness, orderliness, rigidity, overadaptation to social norms, and by dependent and symbiotic tendencies in interper Tonal relationships. This type has been found in numerous studies to be the most frequent variant of premorbid personalities in patients with major depression (v. Zerrsen and Pössl 1990; Mundt et al. 1997; Kronmüleer et al. 2002; Stanghellini et al. 2006). Its structure may also be interpreted in terms of an existential vulnerability: The Melancholic Type is particularly sensitive with regard to situations consisting in inevitable transitions, role changes, and losses—for example, di Force, bereavement, loss of employment, but also becoming a parent, a demanding pro motion in one’s job, children moving out of the home, retirement, etc. In addition, the pa taints try to avoid by all means any situation where guilt or falling short of one’s duties become inescapable. Overall, they shrink back from confrontation with the basic conj sons of existence like decision, guilt, separation, isolation, and finiteness.

Thus, it is ultimately the unavoidable progress and transience of life itself which for the Melancholic Type becomes an existential threat. Being implicitly aware of this vulnerabili ty, the patients seek to protect themselves by what may be called existential defense mechanisms. Trying to avoid fundamental changes, holding oneself within the boundaries of the established order, clinging to close relationships, and avoiding any guilt—all this has the deeper sense of a protection against the transitoriness, but also the inevitable “Fineness” and loneliness of an autonomous existence. This is why the Elan The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders colic Type strives for continuous harmony, social concord, and punctual delivery of du ties. He must owe nothing to anyone since his identity essentially depends on the role which society has assigned to him, not on self-determination and autonomy. However, sooner or later this rigid defense structure proves precarious. If individuals with such a personality structure once fall short of their duties, if they experience unjust Died rejections or the loss of significant others, then their world literally collapses. They find themselves in what Karl Jasper called a limit situation, that means, a situ son where one’s fundamental expections and assumptions about oneself and the world prove illusory.

Importantly, Tellenbach already characterized the premorbid or triggering situation of de precision typical for the Melancholic Type in temporal terms, namely by the notions of “remanence” (lagging behind one’s duties or demands) and “inclusion” (rigid fixation on established orders or relationships, Inability to transcend one’s narrow role identity). Such situations may also be conceived as a desynchronization: Unable to hold pace with the course of events and the demands of the situation, the patient falls back in relation to the shared or intersubjective time. An inability to grieve plays an im portent role for this desynchronization: giving up familiar role patterns and attachments seems too threatening or too painful so that the patient remains stuck in the past. The de pressie illness may thus be regarded as resulting from a limit situation which overbuy dens the patient’s capacities of coping, adaptation, and change.

However, it should also be noted that the proportion of Melancholic Types in depressed patients seems to have been decreasing over the last three decades, whereas (p. 620) oth er, in particular narcissistic personalities, now play a far greater role (Ronningstam 1996; Stiröder 2005; Twinge and Campbell 2008; Twinge and Foster 2010). Their depression, in contrast, is mainly caused by a failure of achievement, on the background of too high aspirations regarding individual performance and success. Feelings of guilt are increase Jingly replaced by feelings of insufficiency and also by hypochondriac fears regarding one’s own bodily performance. With these patients, depression results not from an expert Once of loss or a sense of guilt, but from the perceived discrepancy between a culturally inflated self-image, social demands on achievement, and the individual’s actual self-real ization or performance. Thus, a desynchronization or lagging behind is found here as well, but the major existential threat is no longer guilt or separation as in the Melancholic Type, but the narcissistic shame that arises from missing one’s goals ( Ehrenberg 2010: 128ff.).

Regardless which personality type with its specific vulnerability is taken into account, the notion of desynchronization also points to the social conditions of an ever accelerated so Piety which favors a “remanence” of individuals and, with its demands on continuous in crease in performance and self-optimization, may lead to a “weariness of the self”. Here lies one of the major origins of disorders which were formerly called “exhaustion depression,” but now have received the less stigmatizing designation of “burn-out syndrome.” They are marked by a spiral of excessive demands on oneself and growing psychophysical exhaustion. At the beginning we usually find an extension of The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders working time, with the goal to keep pace with external demands. This results in a loss of the daily structure and the natural rhythms of exertion and regeneration. Despite ever more straining their will, the patients experience increasing inefficiency, followed by Grus ration, inner emptiness, and fatigue to the point of a psychophysical breakdown and fi ally of full-blown depression. A case example may illustrate this: A 34-year-old patient fell ill with a severe depression. Having completed his bus Bess studies and an MBA with top degrees, he had signed up with a prestigious in ternational management consultancy and worked 60 to 80 hours a week, thus more and more losing his friends except his girlfriend whom he only met on week ends. For a project in the USA he commuted between the continents, allowing himself no more than 5 hours sleep per night. When he nevertheless received a “non-sufficient” performance assessment by his superior, this came as a shock.

From that day on, the job became a torment for him, causing increasing doubts in its meaning, severe sleeping disorders and growing exhaustion. He had the feeling of only functioning like a machine and looking at himself from the outside. At the culmination of his social withdrawal, his girlfriend separated from him, which he dissociative identity disorder not even experience as painful. Two weeks later he collapsed at a business meeting and was subsequently admitted to a psychiatric ward. His depression was characterized by predominant feelings of failure and shame, constant self-accuse son and an experience of bodily decay. (Own clinic, T. F.)

The patient’s life plan was characterized by a rigid orientation toward professional achievement at the cost of interpersonal relationships. His efforts of continuous self-ac celebration converged with the demands of an accelerated society, but overburdened the resources of the body, which may only be cyclically regenerated. The ill ion of a continuous narcissistic assent collapsed with the offending assessment, which thus functioned as a limit situation. From now on, an increasing desynchronization Bevel oped, connected with a sense of depersonalization, and finally led to the depression.

(p. 621) Psychopathology of Depression Desynchronization of the Body As we have seen, desynchronization may be regarded as a major triggering situation of depression. The illness itself now corresponds to a switch from a social and existential to a biological desynchronization on a vital level, that means to a partial decoupling between organism and environment. The perceived limit situation may thus be regarded as a “switching point” which induces a reaction of the entire organism, namely a psycho-phys 1 logical slow-down or stasis. At the physiological level, we find a disturbance of bio rhythms such as the euro-endocrine cycles, the menstrual cycle, circadian temperature rhythms, and the sleep/wake cycle. Moreover, the loss of drive, appetite, libido, interest, and attention manifest a general reduction of the conative-affect The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders Dive dynamics of the body that is normally directed to the environment and toward the fu Cure.

This manifests itself, on the one hand, in psychomotor inhibition, a slowing-down of ac son as well as thought, and in an overall deceleration of lived time (see next section). On the other hand, it is also expressed in an increasing rigidity and retardation of the lived body, which loses its fluid functioning and makes itself felt in heaviness, exhaustion, op precision, and general constriction. The stagnation of bodily functions thus results in what may be called a reification or cor porealization of the lived body, which occurs in connection to the temporal deceleration. The body is no longer a transparent medium of one’s relation to the world but rather appears as a burden or an obstacle. Patients experience their bodily functions as slowed down or blocked; in extreme cases, this culminates in depressive stupor, in which a loss of Donation, a petrification of the body, and a standstill of experienced time are combined. The basis for this is the convergence of lived body and lived time in the pri 2 Cary conative dynamics of life.

The psychomotor inhibition and loss of drive also affects the patient’s lived space: Dexter nal goals withdraw in the distance; they lose both their attraction and attainability. The objects are no longer at the disposal of the patient’s body as a matter of course. Thus, lived space as a space of possibilities or affordances shrinks (Fuchs 2007; Radcliffe 2015: 103). The patient can no longer easily transcend the body’s boundaries—which is what we implicitly do when desiring things, reaching for them, walking toward our goals, thus an ticipating the immediate future. Time and space, as we can see, are interconnected: An ticipation of what is possible or what is to come, and the extension of space around us are one and the same thing. For the depressed person, however, the peripersonal space is no longer embodied; there is a (p. 622) gap between the body and its surroundings. This in turn reinforces the bodily constriction and enclosure which was mentioned before.

Intersubjective Desynchroniziation Thus, an inhibition of lived time and Donation is the hallmark of severe depression, as phenomenological psychopathology has pointed out; we will look at this in more detail now. Following Straps (1928 ), in melancholic or endogenous depression the “ego-time” of the movement of life gets stuck, whereas the “world time” goes on and passes by. This can be expressed as a retardation of inner time, depending on the reduced Donation, and a resulting desynchronization from the outer or world time.

Accordingly, in a number of experimental studies depressive persons have been shown to experience a time dilation, that is, they estimated given time intervals to be longer than the objectively measured time (Lech 1975; Kitamura and Kumar 1982; Münzel et al. 1988; Mundt et al. 1998; Bschor et al. 2004; Mahlberg et al. 2008). On the other hand, Thönes and Oberfeld (2015 ), in a more recent meta-analysis, reported no significant dif ferences in time perception tasks between depressed patients and normal controls, while confirming the significance of subjective time retardation. Here, it might be necessary to The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders distinguish severe from mild and moderate depression, as confirmed by the study of Münzel et al., who found a measurable time dilation in endogenous depressives, 3 but not in neurotic and reactive depressives.

In any case, it should be emphasized that the inhibition of inner time is not only an Hindi visual experience, but connected to the social desynchronization, as expressed by the fol lowing patient: My inner clock seems to stand still, while the clocks of the others run on. In every thing I do I am unable to move forward, as if I am paralyzed. I lag behind my du ties. I am stealing time. (Own clinic, T. F.)

All the patients’ attempts to keep up with events and obligations fail and reinforce their feeling of remanence, resulting in an increasing decoupling from intersubjective contemn orality. To this is added a loss of intercorporeal resonance and Effective attunement: Whereas conversations are normally accompanied by an exchange of ex pressions and by a tacit synchronization of gestures and gazes, the patients’ countenance remains frozen, and their attunement with others fails. They are no longer capable of be ing moved and affected by things, situations, or other persons, even their relatives. Painfully they experience their lifelessness and rigidity in contrast to the dynamics of life going on around them. In his autobiographical account, Solomon describes his depression as “a loss of feeling, a numbness, [which] had infected all my human relations. I din’t care about love; about my work; about family; about friends...” ( Solomon 2001: 45).

Based on an embodied account of emotions, the lack of emotional life may be derived from the rigidity and corporealization of the lived body: Without bodily resonance, emotions may no longer be expressed or felt. Moreover, since emotions are also motivating forces, their lack contributes to the disturbance of (p. 623) Donation and the overall retardation of temporality. The resulting state, often de Ascribed by the patients as a “feeling of not-feeling,” can also be regarded as an Effective depersonalization: As the basic sense of self is bound to bodily self-affection, the failure of conative-Effective dynamics is accompanied not only by a loss of contemporality with others but also by a profound self-alienation.

Alteration of Future and Past While the alterations described so far mainly affect the intersubjective present, we now look at the dimensions of future and past.

Since Donation provides the propulsive energy that directs us toward the future, its lack results in a retraction of the future as a space of anticipated possibilities. This concerns the immediate bodily capacity of action as well as the pursuit of longer-term projects: It became impossible to reach anything. Like, how do I get up and walk to that chair... To get out of bed at midday was an ordeal. I felt that I had nothing to look forward to, no interest in anything—in short I felt totally apathetic.

The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders (Lott 1996: 246–247)

What remains is an empty volition that is unable to set the body in motion and to engage in longer-term plans. Moreover, without the recurrent cycles of need and satisfaction, or anticipation and fulfillment, the cyclical structure of lived time is increasingly replaced by a linear, homogeneous time that the patient cannot engage in and shape. Thus, on the one hand, the future is blocked, on the other hand it turns into an empty “flight of time” irreversibly running toward death. This uninhibited rule of linear time is illustrated by two further quotations: I am only waiting for the day to come to an end—another meaningless day, merely a further step towards death.

(Own clinic, T. F.)

The fact that symphonies come to an end frightened me. The way a piece of music moves towards its end in accordance with an inner logic and even hurries towards it in an irreversible sequence—that was the course of my life, and what happened in the past is unalterable, irrevocable.

(Kuiper 1991: 168; own translation)

Future thus loses its character of openness, possible novelty or surprise. Instead, it be comes as a mechanical process leading to an inevitable end, which is known from the past, or to some inescapable calamity. It adopts itself the perfect tense and thus becomes the future perfect, especially in the form frequently used by patients in their complaints: the feared event (ruin, punishment, death) will then have certainly taken place. As Minkowski already observed, without one’s own impetus toward the future, “the whole of becoming seems to rush toward us, a hostile force which must bring suffering” (1970: 188).The future is thus obstructed, occupied by an already impending and determined doom.

A complementary change is found in the experience of the past. Since progress toward the future is blocked, the patients are also unable to close up and leave behind their past experiences. “The more the inhibition increases and the speed of inner time slows down, the (p. 624) more the determining power of the past is experienced”. As Kuiper writes in his self-report of a psychotic depression: What has happened can never be undone again. Not only the things go by, but also possibilities pass by unused. If one does not accomplish something in time, it is never done any more... The real essence of time is indelible guilt.

(Kuiper 1991: 155, 162; own translation)

Frequently, mistakes made long ago are then experienced as if they had just been com Fitted—a paradox, which Kimura has expressed as a continuing perfect tense instead of 4 the preterit. In the perfect, the past is not actually over, it can no longer be forgotten The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders and becomes a facticity accumulated in the present. “I understand that the time may be past, but the past is still present as an accusation,” is Kuiper’s description (1991: 156). Guilt is thus reified and cannot be obliterated in the future through the development of relationships to others: “One has said things which cannot be made unsaid; one can no longer escape from what one has done” (own clinic, T. F.). Since reparation or change are deemed impossible, the future subjunctive, as Binswanger remarked (1960: 26f.), with draws into the past and becomes past subjunctive, an empty possibility of lamenting: “ if only I had done (not done) this. ” Such typical phrases manifest the vain attempt to re Grieve the lost scope of possibilities in the past, yet with the obvious result of merely in creasing the burden of regret and guilt.

Transition to Delusion With increasing inhibition, the basic movement of life comes to a standstill. The depress chive has fallen out from contemporality and literally lives in another, sluggish time—usual ly expressed in the complaint that time stretches in a tormenting way. This reified, spa tialized time can be subdivided in the way that, normally, only physically measurable time can be. This becomes manifest in the not infrequent appearance of iterative or compel chive symptoms: I sit at home noticing that time moves forward agonizingly slowly. Another mo Bent, still another moment... At times, I actually have to count the seconds, from one to five, one to five, again and again—completely meaningless. (Own clinic, T.

F.)

As Minkowski remarked, counting moments of objective time may create a mechanical forward movement. “This progression, or rather this illusion of progression, comes to fill in for the weakening dynamism” (Minkowski 1970: 299). If life no longer unfolds and grows in the temporal stream of self-realization or “becoming”, it re mains an empty sequence of moments: “Time degenerates into mere succession when our ability to fulfill time falters,” writes Theunissen (1991: 304). No longer able to live and shape time actively, the depressive patient succumbs, powerless, to its mechanical dome Dance.

Complete desynchronization from intersubjective time is marked by the transition into melancholic delusion. It can be understood as the explicit manifestation of the disturbed conative temporalization at the implicit level: Past and future have now been finally fiat ed, frozen into the perfect tense of irreversible guilt, and in the future perfect of certain ruin, decay, or death. (p. 625) At the same time, a return to the shared contemporality with others has become unimaginable. They are separated from the patient by an abyss and can no longer be reached. With the loss of contemporality the flexibility of perspectivetaking is lost as well, since this is essentially based on an open future allowing for alter natives to one’s convictions. The patient, however, is forced to equate his self with his current experience: “It has always been and will always be like this”—to be told anything different must be an illusion. Even the explicit memory of a recovery from The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders an earlier depression remains abstract for the patient and does nothing to change the hopelessness of the present situation. The same is true of his past integrity which was nothing but a sham in view of his actual depravity—it was only a pretense, a fraud.

Depressive delusions may thus be described as “frozen realities”—beliefs and convictions which result from the freezing of self-temporalization and which resist any change or in tersubjective alignment of perspectives. In this sense, hypochondriac delusions can be understood as being rooted in abnormal bodily experiences that manifest the stagnation of bodily functions and are considered irreversible. Delusions of guilt express the expert Once of irrevocably falling behind one’s duties, of not being able to forget, of being con scantly forced to remember one’s past mistakes. Finally, in Dotard’s syndrome or nihilistic delusion the patient feels as if he were already dead and had to exist in this state forever. The standstill of lived time has become absolute, resulting in an eternity of the present. However, this is obviously the opposite of the mystical “nun steins” in which the fleeting course of time is suspended by a fulfilled present: I do not exist any more. When someone speaks to me, I feel as if he were speaking to a dead person.... I have the feeling of being an absent person. In sum, I am a walking shadow. (Quote of a patient by Minkowski 1970: 328)

The sense of reality that goes missing in Dotard’s syndrome may be considered as being ultimately based on the synchronization of self and world, brought about, above all, through intercorporeality and contemporality: reality is at its basis always a shared real ty. Nihilistic delusions thus manifest the extreme of a Cereal ization that results from the loss of Effective attunement to a shared world.

Finally, depressive suicides may also be regarded as the consequent realization of the overall standstill of time and loss of intersubjective contemporality. Although this is only rarely experienced in the extreme form of Dotard’s syndrome, it nevertheless already comes near to an experience of death. On the one hand, suicide then realizes or literally “executes” this experience; on the other hand, it also means the last perceived possibility to escape the tormenting state of frozenness by an act of will—paradoxically speaking, to restore the future for one last time with the intention to annihilate it once and for all.

Before looking at possible therapeutic strategies that may be derived from this account of depression, we will first look at the temporality of chronic depression and mania.

Chronic Depression Chronic depression is a frequent phenomenon: about 30% of depressions are classified as chronic, or as Persistent Depressive Disorder according to DSM-5, that is, lasting for at least (p. 626) two years. Chronic depress ion may occur either as primary dysthymia or result from a major depression that does not completely remit (Chronic Major Depressive Disorder, CMDD). It is usually character The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders zed by a milder degree of somatic symptoms such as inhibition, weight loss, and vital dis turbances; in other words, Donation is less affected than mood and emotions.

Nevertheless, the subjective suffering may even be more pronounced than in acute and severe depression. In CMDD, this is mainly due to a secondary neurotic development: On the one hand, the repeated experience of failure and disappointment regarding a hopedfor remission leads to increasing resignation and despair. A diminished and miserable life seems to be the inevitable prospect for all further future. In this way, depressive mood, so to speak, maintains and reinforces itself with increasing duration. On the other hand, sec ondary consequences of depression may contribute to the chronification, such as loss of one’s job, attrition and disruption of relationships, stigmatization and social exclusion, but also a secondary gain derived from the patient role and a fixation on one’s illness. In all these respects, the patients’ relation to themselves, their stance-taking toward their own condition becomes a major component of the illness itself, even more pronounced than in acute depression.

Although the experience of implicit or inner time in chronic depression is not necessarily slowed down as it is in severe depression, patients usually experience a uniformity and sameness of past, present, and future—as it were, a monotonous landscape of dejection and failure: “This is how my life has always been, and how it will remain in the future.” In this landscape of futility, ultimately nothing has significance—everything just passes. As Minkowski explains, “it is in the orientation of our life toward the future which gives it a meaning, a direction: when this orientation is missing, everything seems to amount to the same thing, seems stupid, without rhyme or reason...” ( Minkowski 1970: 303), and this is what chronically depressed patients describe.

Moreover, low self-esteem, self-fulfilling prophecies of failure, and increasing feelings of hopelessness constitute vicious circles that maintain the illness. Patients withdraw from social contacts in resignation or mute accusation, and they often discourage their Bela Dives, friends, and caregivers by their lamenting behavior. Not infrequently, rejective, de valuating, or even hostile attitudes may emerge. This secondary development is obviously different from the Melancholic Type personality which is mainly oriented toward social at tenement, harmony, and compliance with the demands of others. In the background, there is often a developmental history of early trauma and psychological insults (emotion al or sexual abuse, neglect, or other kinds of maltreatment) that has lead to a lifetime pat tern of interpersonal avoidance and distrust. This pattern now significantly impedes the remission of the depression and has to be addressed by specific psychotherapeutic ap roaches.

The Phenomenology of Mania Mania is obviously the antithesis of depression. The depressive heaviness, inhibition, and retardation is replaced by lightness, disinhibition, and acceleration. The lived body, in stead of its constriction in depression, is characterized by a centrifugal expansion, which is due to an increase of vital drive and connation, and accompanied by a general sense of The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders power and (p. 627) appropriation. The body seems to have lost all resistance that normally impedes acting out every impulse immediately. Accordingly, the patient’s lived space is extended, abounding with possibilities and affordances that all seem attractive and promising. However, mania is not so much a state of happiness and cheerfulness, but rather a state of superficial elation, often experienced with feelings of flying or floating. One may speak of a “vital euphoria,” since the manic mood is not due to a primary narcs sistic grandiosity, but mainly to the excess of drive, energy, and Donation. On the other hand, mania may also display the well-known “mixed states,” characterized by emotional ability and rapid shifts between euphoria, dysphoria, and irritability. This points out that the crucial alteration in mania consists in the excess of Donation, while the resulting mood states may vary to a certain extent, depending not least on the resistance which the patients meet in their environs Bent, but also on an imminent shift to a depressive phase.

Regarding temporality, we find the opposite type of desynchronization as compared to de precision, namely an acceleration and thus, a partial decoupling of the inner time from the 5 world time. Accordingly, manic action is characterized by restless hustle and agitation; the patients only fleetingly enter into contact with the world and others. The present is never enough, but virtually marked by what is still missing or what would be possible; the interest is always distracted in fa vor of the next-to-come. Whereas depressive patients keep lamenting over missed oppor unities of the past, manic persons are constantly ahead of themselves, addicted to the seemingly unlimited scope of possibilities. The future cannot be awaited and expected, but must be assailed and seized immediately. Impatience leaves no ease for pursuing long-term goals. The past, on the other hand, is forgotten as soon as new alluring options and possibilities emerge; commitments are betrayed in favor of a more enticing future.

All this leads to a momentary life, consisting of isolated “Bows,” not allowing for a sus Gained development and conclusion of projects. The manic mode of existence is volatile, playful, and provisional; both the past and the long-term future lose their influence on the present. If one project fails, half a dozen other plans take its place at once, resulting in a spinning round on the spot without actual efficacy. In so do ing, manic persons neglect the natural rhythms which oppose their acceleration: They re press the cyclic time of the body in favor of a homogeneous, linearly accelerated time. They disregard the needs of their body, deny it the necessary sleep, and ig ore the signs of beginning exhaustion. The body is thus exploited mercilessly and turned into a mere vehicle of the inflated drive. The rhythmic, and as such also retarding, mo Bent of existence is no longer perceived, but rather repressed or overrun.

If we turn to intersubjectivity, we find the patients bustling around in dispersed attention, without being able to take a specific interest in others. Though the manic person con scantly approaches and seizes them, he soon loses his interest once they do not partici pate, and no deeper Effective connection results. The patient’s euphoria feigns affection, but actually remains a fixed state of empty cheerfulness. Since the component of receptive ity in contact with others is lacking, all encounters cannot establish satisfaction and ful The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders filament. Lack of distance and disinhibition, often a sexualized behavior to the point of promiscuity, may have a (p. 628) destructive effect on personal relationships. Frequently, the manic episode leaves behind a mess of job loss, debts, or divorce.

In sum, in mania the movement of life is accelerated and overtakes the external, social, or world time. Manic patients thus live over their means and exhaust their biological and so Dial resources to the point of depletion and breakdown. Even though they may not realize this immediately for lack of self-criticism, the disillusionment after the manic episode is all the more profound and may often contribute to a sudden fall from mania into depress ion. In the long term, the upheavals of bipolar disorder cause a recurrent disruption of the steady course of one’s life and may even lead to a fragmentation of narrative identity: If you are manic-depressive, your life has no continuity any longer. What could be narrated as a more or less consistent story before, disintegrates in retrospect into unconnected areas and fragments. The illness has blown up your past, and to an even greater extent it threatens your future. With every manic episode, your life as you knew it becomes more impossible. The person who you thought to be and to know does not possess a firm foundation any more. You can no longer be sure of yourself.

(Belle 2016: 113)

The repeated experience of becoming “a completely different person” may thus severely undermine one’s sense of authenticity and diachronic identity. It certainly calls not only for long-term medication, but also for a continuous and trusting therapeutic relationship that is able to help patients distinguish between different states of self, to bridge periods of self-loss, and to compensate for the recurrent social desynchronization caused by the illness.

Conclusion: A Resynchronizing Therapy In this chapter, I have described depression as a desynchronization of the individual from the shared contemporality, which turns into a physiological desynchronization of organ ism and environment. As an inhibition of vitality, it proceeds to impair the conative basis of experience. The loss of goal-oriented capacities of the body, of drive, appetite, and de 6 sire are equivalent to a slowing-down of lived time to the point of its standstill. As a re ult, time emerges explicitly and in reified form, in particular as a reification of the past and the future. Thus the guilt, the losses, and failures gain dominance over the future and its possibilities. No longer able to live time actively, the depressive person succumbs to its dominance. Melancholic delusion is the utter manifestation of the decoupling from com mon time. The various Effective, cognitive, sensorimotor, and social symptoms of depress ion, despite not always having time as their manifest theme, are thus traced back to an underlying disturbance of lived time. In mania, on the other hand, we find largely opp The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders site, but equally detrimental connections between Donation, temporality, and intersubjec tivity.

(p. 629) From this point of view, the treatment of Effective disorders should have the aim to restore and support the failing processes of synchronization. Apart from biological ap roaches, a psychosocial “ resynchronizing therapy,” which I shortly outline for depress ion, should take into account the following guidelines: The first requirement would be a spatial and temporal frame creating a legit mate recovery period for the patient, a “time-out” so to speak, during which he or she can gradually readopt to the common social course of time with as little pressure as possible. This will often require hospitalization. In this phase of treatment the aim is to loosen the rigidity of bodily restriction and anxiety, which is achieved by psy chotropic medication, relaxation techniques, and moderate bodily exercise, but also by the relief of everyday tasks that overburden the patient’s capacities.

Secondly, it is important to give rhythm to everyday life, that is, to emphasize repetition and regularity in the structure of the day and week. This cyclical temporal ity helps the patient to gain a stand against the fleeting, linear time and to support the resynchronization of internal and external rhythms.

A careful activation therapy may support the patient’s orientation toward future goals, however modest. This may be stressful at first, since the patient’s own, appeti Dive motivation is still missing and each action is in immediate danger of not satisfy ing his or her high demands on achievement. It is therefore important to explain to the patient that the intentional arc alone, which he draws in planning and execution, is enough to extend his sensorimotor space again und to re-establish his directed Bess toward the future.

From this follows the principle of “optimal resynchronization”: The patient should experience a degree of activation and stimulation appropriate to his present state, so that the empty time is filled again without, however, causing a relapse into uncou led time by forced rehabilitation. The image of a gear-change suggests itself here, where different levels of synchronization are chosen according to the present capaci ty.

After the remission of acute depression, it becomes important to further the psy chological and social processes of resynchronization whose failure have contributed to the onset of illness, above all, processes of grief and role change. This will usually be continued in outpatient psychotherapy.

These guidelines may be combined with different psychotherapeutic approaches, which are certainly among the most important means of ultimately re-establishing intersubjec Dive contemporality. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Stiröder, A.. Der Narzisstische Types als pathoplastische Variate der Primär-per sönlichkeit unipolar Depressive. Cine empirische Studio über die Zunahme narzisstischer Perchönlichkeitszüge in der zweiten Hälate des 20. Jahrhunderts. Heidelberg: Med. Kisser Cation Universityät.

Sheets-Johnston M.. “Emotion and Movement. A Beginning Empirical-Phenom nological Analysis of Their Relationship.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 6: 259–277.

Slay, J. and Stephan, A.. “Effective intentionality and self-consciousness.” Con sciousness and Cognition 17: 506-513.

Slay J., Paskaleva A., and Stephan A.. “Inactive Emotion and Impaired Agency in Depression.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 20: 33–55.

Solomon A.. The Noonday Demon: An Atlas of Depression. London: Vintage Books.

Stanghellini G.. Disembodied Spirits and Deanimatied Bodies: The Psychopatholo gy of Common Sense. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Stanghellini G., Bertelli M., and Raballo A.. “Types Melancholics: Personality Structure and the Characteristics of Major Unipolar Depressive Episode.” Journal of Af fictive Disorders 93: 159–167.

Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., Pesenza S., Mancini M., Northoff G., and Cutting J.. “Abnormal Time Experiences in Major Depression: An Empirical Qualitative Study.” Psy chopathology 50: 125–140.

The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders Straps E.. “Das Zeiterlebnis in der endogenen Depression und in der psychopaths teen Verstimmung.” Monatsschrift für Psychiatric und Neurologie 68: 640–656.

Straps E.. “Disorders of Personal Time in Depressive State.” Southern Medical Journal 40: 254–259.

Swan before Christ, Secunda S. K., Kate M. M., et al.. “Specificity of Mixed Effective States: Clinical Comparison of Dysphoric Mania and Agitated Depression.” Journal of Af fictive Disorders 28: 81–89.

Tatossian A.. “Déprecision, vécu dépressif et orientation thérapeutique.” In Collect tif (ed.), La maladies depressive, pp. 277–293. Paris: Cuba.

Tellenbach H.. Melancholy. History of the Problem, Endogeneity, Typology, Patio genesis, Clinical Considerations. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

(p. 633) Theunissen M.. Negative Theologies der Zit. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

Thönes S. and Oberfeld D.. “Time Perception in Depression: A Meta-Analysis.” Journal of Effective Disorders 175: 359–372.

Twinge, J. M. and Campbell, S. M.. Generational differences in psychological traits and their impact on the workplace. Journal of Managerial Psychology 23: 862-877.

Twinge, J. M. and Foster, J. D.. Birth cohort increases in narcissistic personality traits among American college students, 1982–2009. Social Psychological and Personality Science 1: 99-106.

Vargas S.. “Depersonalization and the Sense of Realness.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 19: 103–113.

Wear T. A. and Goodwin F. K.. “Biological Rhythms in Manic-depressive Illness.” In T. A. Wear and F. K. Goodwin (eating disorders.), Circadian Rhythms in Psychiatry, pp.129–184. Pacific Grove, California: Boxwood.

Zerssen, D. von and Pössl, J.. The premorbid personality of patients with different subtypes of an Effective illness: Statistical analysis of blind assignment of case history da ta to clinical diagnoses. Journal of Effective Disorders 18: 39-50.

Notes:

1 ( ) From a sociobiological point of view, depression may also be regarded as an evolution ary protective mechanism in situations of social stress or defeat which consists in a psy cho-physiological block or paralysis, in passive-submissive behavior toward other mem Hers of the tribe, and which dispenses the individual temporarily from social demands and competitive situations.

The Life-World of Persons with Mood Disorders 2 ( ) It should be remarked that there are also mixed states with felt constriction despite still remaining drive and Donation, usually called “anxious” or “agitated depression.” In these, patients experience a feeling of drivenness or urgency without any escape.

3 ( ) For a neurophenomenological account of desynchronization of inner and world time, investigating its possible neurophysiological correlates in somatomotor and sensory brain networks, see Northoff et al. 2017.

4 ( ) Bin Kimura, Time and Self, Tokyo 1982; quoted after Kobayashi 1998: 168.

5 ( ) This acceleration of lived temporality may be experimentally verified: In studies on time estimation, hypo-manic and manic patients usually experience a shortening of time periods.

6 ( ) It may be of interest to note that in a comparative study of major depressive and schizo ophrenia patients, Stanghellini et al. found that in major depressive disorder, unlike in schizophrenia, there is no disarticulation or fragmentation of time-experience (i.e. no disorder of the temporal synthesis of protection, presentation, and retention) but a disorder of Donation or “inhibition of becoming.” On this important difference, see also Fuchs 2013a.

Thomas Fuchs Thomas Fuchs, MD, PhD, is a psychiatrist and philosopher, and Jasper Professor and head of the section ‘Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy’ at the Department of Psychiatry in Heidelberg, Chairman of the Section ‘Philosophical Foundations of Psychiatry’ of the German Psychiatric Association (DGPPN), and Fel low of the Marsilius-Kolleg (Center for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies) at the University of Heidelberg. His major research areas are phenomenological psy chopathology, psychology and psychotherapy; coherence and disorders of self-expert Once, phenomenology and cognitive neuroscience, and history and ethics of medicine and psychiatry.

The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person # The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person Martin Bürgy The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Sep 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Taking up the work of Karl Jasper, we develop a phenomenological method, which has not been fully used in clinical practice. We describe three levels of understanding of psy chiatric symptoms: the static understanding as a description of symptoms in the here and now; the genetic understanding of symptom development; and the hermeneutic under standing as an interpretation of meaning and sense. This phenomenological method is il lustrated using its application in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Previous findings are thus organized and illustrated on the basis of a case study. This leads us to a deeper un derstanding of obsessive-compulsive disorder, both from the disturbance side, as well as from the defending and coping side, to a deeper understanding, too, of its development and of the worldand self-experiencing.

Keywords: phenomenology, psychiatric methodology, levels of understanding, Karl Jasper, obsessive-compulsive disorder # Introduction THE development of international classification systems has ended the “Babylonian con fusion” in the language used in psychiatry and has led to reliable diagnoses ( Müleer 1986). Yet, the descriptive classifications lack any real connection to the etiology of the conditions, which reduces their therapeutic relevance. According to Andreasen, there are increasing problems with the validity of psychiatric diagnoses caused by the lack of com petence in phenomenology. This is due, in particular, to the reduction of psychiatric jag noses to the use of checklists of symptoms. These problems are also re Elected in the current diagnostic classification of obsessive-compulsive disorder.

The phenomenological method, however, remains a necessary precondition for being able to approach the patient’s experience in as objective a manner as possible, and for being able to record this precisely, and to differentiate and describe it. Together with its imper Dance for the validity of psychiatric diagnoses, it is at the same time important for psy The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person chotherapy and pharmacotherapy and the further development of biological approaches. Phenomenology fundamentally means, however, placing the focus of attention on the human subject, which is more than its bio logical and psychological functions. Compared with the analytical methods of the natural sciences, and because this method is rooted in philosophy and anthropology, attention is always directed to the entirety of the person and to the synthesis of the individual find Dings.

The present chapter is a phenomenological investigation of obsessive-compulsive conj sons. It is structured on three levels: from the static understanding, via the genetic un derstanding, to the hermeneutic understanding as initially described by Jasper. It starts with a succinct account of these three levels of understanding. Against this background, the chapter explores the relationships between the description, genesis, and meaning of (p. 635) symptoms and investigates the life-world of people with obsessive-compulsive dis order. These findings are illustrated on the basis of a case study.

Three Levels of “Understanding”

In General Psychopathology, we encounter three different ways of understanding, which Jasper continued to modify from the first edition of 1913 up to his final revision of the last edition of 1959. Here, understanding always means “the concept son of the psychological which is gained from within”, which has an impressive immediacy, and which is developed in a methodical sequence of levels. The first level is that of “static understanding,” which focuses the direct experience of the patient in the here and now and which is classed as being descriptive phenomenology. The second level is that of “genetic understanding,” in which an attempt is made to put oneself in the patient’s shoes in order to investigate how psychological phenomena arise from one an other. The “empathetic understanding” was initially presented by Jasper as a stand-alone method, but it was later logically subsumed under the genetic understanding. Jasper ini sally still called his third stage “understanding and interpreting,” but he later renamed this as “seizing the totality.” By this he meant that research, which has as its subject the individual and the specific, cannot succeed without an orientation to the whole, and thus to a certain extent also without an orientation to meaning and sense. The movement from the individual to the whole, for example, from individual phenomenon to the total expert Once of the person or from the individual symptom to the ideal-typical unity of the mental disorder, is completed in the hermeneutic circle. I will refer to this third level of understanding as “hermeneutic understanding.” These three ways of understand ing described here are built on one another and are intertwined. The further understand ing is removed from the direct object of experience and the more it brings into focus the genesis or the entirety of the person and the illness, or the general points underlying it, the more interpretive and speculative, but also the more complete, the findings will be. This methodological procedure has not yet been fully realized in relation to mental ill Fesses. Even the two major case studies by Tellenbach on melancholy and by Blankenburg on schizophrenia lack this methodological order.

The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person In his later work on “ Phenomenology as the Foundational Discipline of Psychiatry ” (Phänomenologie als Grundlagendisziplin der Psychiatric ) in 1991 Blacken burg wrote: “For the future, it’s an important task to bring descriptive, genetic and hermeneutical phenomenology into a close connection with one another (Blankenburg 1991: 99). (Compare: Stanghellini, chapter on Phenomenological psychotherapy, in this Handbook.)

The Static Understanding The static understanding focuses on direct experience in the investigative situation and therefore represents the highest level of evidence. A review of the phenomena, which is as unbiased as possible, as required by Husserl, is complemented by the targeted check ing of diagnostic assumptions that have developed historically and which lead the invest Cation.

(p. 636) The first description of a patient with an obsessive compulsion—in this case, a fear of touching—is provided by Esquirol in 1839. He emphasizes the two characteristics of the constant fight against the obsessive thoughts whilst at the same time maintaining the insight into their ridiculousness. In the German-speaking countries it was v. Kraft-Eking who introduced the concept of obsession in 1867. However, he used this term to describe a compulsion which the melancholy state of mind exercises on per captions. In an 1868 lecture to the Berlin Medical-Psychological So Piety, Griesinger described three patients who had obsessive ideas which were not sup ported by affect. Westphal was, in 1877, the first person to provide a definition of compulsion, to cover the phenomena described by Griesinger, and this define son, though it has since been modified, remains valid to this day: By obsessive ideas, I mean those ideas which, with otherwise normal intelligence and without being determined by an emotional or affect-like state, appear in the mind of the person affected by them, against and contrary to their will and which they cannot remove, such that these ideas prevent and intersect with the person’s normal course of ideas. These ideas are always experienced by the person as be ing abnormal and alien to him and as being ones which he would oppose, were he in full control of his consciousness.

(Westphal 1877: 669)

In his work, “ Conceptual Investigation into Compulsion ” (Begriffliche Untersuchung über den Twang ) in 1939, Schneider explicitly disputes the work of Westphal and arrives at a “core definition” which is linguistically simpler and extremely sharp, and which later found its way into his Clinical Psychopathology: “We speak of compulsion when a person is unable to displace contents of his consciousness even though he finds these to be non sensical or experiences them to be dominating his thoughts without good reason to do so” (Schneider 1939: 23–24). With this formulation, Schneider created not only the pre conditions for making a differential diagnostic delimitation between delusional and affect The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person Dive disorders, but also an orientation for the diagnostic exploration of obsessive-compel chive disorders which has remained valid until the present day. His definition was accepted into the psychiatric classification systems even though it has since undergone further modifications.

The tenth edition of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) places obsessions (intrusive or obsessive thoughts) and compulsions (compulsive actions) in a relationship of equal value. The fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistic cal Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-fourth), by contrast, allocates obsessivecompulsive disorders to the category of anxiety disorders, which implies a dynamic Bela tionship between primary obsessions (usually obsessive thoughts), which create anxiety, and secondary compulsions (usually compulsive actions), which serve to control the anti ety. DSM-5 does indeed set aside the subordination of the obsessive-compulsive disorders to the category of anxiety disorders and it introduces degrees of insight into the foolishness of the compulsions, but it retains the structure of conditions in relation to obsessions and compulsions. Schneider (1939 ) had already formulated this relationship between primary and secondary compel ions: an item of the contents of consciousness intrudes to which the “I” then adopts a po sition. Schneider maintained his descriptive position, and this is presumably why he nev er made any reference to the works of Binder, which were heavily influenced by psycho analysis, and who, a few years previously, had characterized the primary compulsion as being the actual “disturbing (p. 637) psychism” which is followed by the “defense psy Schism”. In a phenomenological approach to obsessive-compulsive disorder, I have above all pointed to the differential diagnostic significance of the distinction be tween primary and secondary compulsions. While, on the behavioral level, it is usually on ly non-specific symptoms (especially washing and checking compulsions) that stand out, an investigation of the primary phenomena can allow the distinction between delusional thoughts and obsessions to be made (Ballerina and Stanghellini 1989; Bürgy 2007).

The organization of the obsessive-compulsive phenomena described found its way into the further differentiation of obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Despite their great formal Mimi Parity, obsessive-compulsive symptoms can vary widely in their phenomenology. One ad Dance in this field is provided especially by the factor-analytical differentiation of sub types. Working on the basis of the four main sub types, Hoffman and Hofmann have produced some exemplary phenomenological work on the threat and defense sides of obsessive-compulsive conditions. This not only further limits the importance of anxiety in obsessive-compel chive disorder, but it also allows a deeper insight to be gained into the primary and main Gaining phenomena.

1. Compulsive checking: The perceived threat to the individual, which is at the root of compulsive checking, is that feeling of incompleteness which Janet was the first to describe in relation to obsessive-compulsive disorder in 1903 (Ocker and GöInner 2006). In an act of defense, this primary feeling is externalized and symbolically fought against. There is therefore, for example, no end to the checking of electrical The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person appliances and plug sockets because neither the person’s affect nor his insight ar rives at the conclusion that the action has been completed. The patient suffers from the conviction that there is a permanent threat emanating from him, which always seeks and finds new contents.

2. Compulsive repetition, compulsive orderliness, and obsessive thoughts: These are all related to the threat posed to a person by his thoughts about blasphemy, his own serious misdeeds, illness, dirtiness, contamination, and shame in relation to his own person or body. Compulsive repetition and compulsive orderliness are attempts to neutralize this threat. The disturbance phenomenon at the root of this behavior is not, for example, the fear that a fire could break out or that a close relative could be harmed in an accident, but rather the fear that one could have caused the fire or the accident oneself and without noticing this. This kind of thinking is magical thinking and indicates the person has deficiencies in his self-perception. His consciousness and his attentiveness are not reliable.

3. Washing, polishing, and cleaning compulsions: A thorough examination of the roots of these phenomena shows that they are not based on a fear of the threat of contamination but rather on disgust at the thought of potentially touching or having touched the objects in question. A closer examination of the fear of contamination and illness shows that this is merely a secondary rationalization of a primary, over powering sensitivity to disgust. As a representative of the German phenomenology cal-anthropological school, v. Gebsattel had already described the “disgust-phobia of the obsessive-compulsive person” in 1954 and he stated that this was the original cause of compulsive washing.

(p. 638) 4. Collecting and hoarding: Compulsive collecting and hoarding relates to ob Sects of relatively low value, which over the course of time fill living spaces, making them unusable for the purposes of actually living. Secondary rationalizations for this type of behavior are thriftiness or providing for times of emergency. The patient feels an intimate connection with the objects for which he is responsible and to which he in part ascribes mental sensations. The defensive aspect of these behaviors is to cre ate a sense of security against the threat posed by dissolution and emptiness by in Bulging in this “hoarding behavior.” Different authors have therefore attributed the origins of this phenomenon to a “disorder of the self” or to a “weakness in the inch ration of the I” ( Lang 1986; Quint 1988; Bürgy 2001).

The common feature in all these experiences remains the sense of incompleteness in Bela son to one’s own person, feelings of not being present in a legitimate or complete way, that actions cannot be completed and of running the risk of harming others. Hoarding and collecting can be seen as attempts to deal with a person’s own incompleteness and emptiness, in the same way as washing, polishing, and cleaning are attempts to fend off feelings of disgust, and fear of confusion and disintegration. The depersonalization exp rience plays a special role in actions which cannot be completed, in the phobic avoidance of a “disgusting substance,” in the magical thinking surrounding ideas of harming other people and in the ever-more intrusive and pressing obsessive thoughts. The following de The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person Ascription of acute clinical decomposition of obsessive-compulsive disorder includes fac tors of all four subtypes.

Case Study on Static Understanding A twenty-four-year-old student, Ms A., had a diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder for at least four years. She was admitted as an inpatient at a psychiatric unit for the first time because her fears had become uncontrollable. Ms A. reported that in the run-up to her admission to the clinic, she visited her grandmother, her father’s mother, in the Burs ing home, who suffered terrible pains in her hip. She went on to say that the nursing staff initially gave her grandmother Paracetamol and later on “strong Pregabalin.” She report ed that while her grandmother was taking the medication she said to her, “I am taking this for you.” This led Ms A. to develop a sense of deep responsibility and guilt. Because of this she felt unable to go into the nursing home to see her grandmother again because she was afraid that she had injured or even killed her grandmother. She felt embarrassed to say this but she could not get rid of the feelings of anxiety and guilt, even though she knew that this was nonsense. The compulsions got the upper hand over her. She said that when she went to the nursing home she ought to have been thinking the right way about it and that she should not have had any frightening images in her mind, for example, that there was a knife sticking into her grandmother and that everything was covered in blood. The more she felt herself to be under pressure, the more urgent these intrusive im ages and thoughts became, the more she had to keep checking and the more insecure she became. She wan’t able to speak to her parents because she feared that this would lead to her receiving the news of her grandmother’s death. She said that she no longer felt safe and that she had a strange feeling that she was going mad. She took refuge in the clinic, because she was afraid her grandmother would die. She reported that she feared (p. 639) becoming contaminated with the “sticky and disgusting nature of her grandmoth er” when she was with her parents or her boyfriend. She was overwhelmed with washing, disinfecting, and checking things and had felt “as though she was detached” from herself.

Because of her pronounced depersonalization and desultory thinking, it took a few days before proper evidence for Ms A.’s accounts of her experience could be found. Her pre sensation of her current life-world made it easier to discern the extent of her compel ions. She portrayed two life-worlds which were strictly separated from one another: “A normal world and a world of compulsions.” When she was at home with her parents she avoided everything. She had her own little room there which her parents were not al lowed to enter, which she constantly washed. She entered it after completing a particular ritual, as though entering a canal lock, and dissociative identity disorder not want to leave it again. She also report ed that she had a perfectly planned cleaning ritual for whenever she returned to her own room at the college where she was studying. This involved her own litter bin, bags, and clean bathing shoes so that she would not bring any part of her boyfriend or parents into her flat with her. She felt that her hand washing, showering, and cleaning her room helped her to create distance and to calm her feelings down. When her feelings became too strong and confused, she no longer felt “herself,” she felt that she became detached The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person from her body and became a real robot. She always met her boyfriend outside of her flat or at her parents’ home and only had sex with him in a hotel where everything was hy gienic and sterile. Her female friends were allowed to visit her in her flat because they wren’t contaminated. She led a very normal student life with them, which was not affect ed by her compulsions.

The Genetic Understanding Genetic understanding follows as the second level of understanding and investigates the question as to how obsessive symptoms develop or how these emerge from the patient’s personality and their life-story. It is usually recorded retrospectively and is therefore of lesser evidential value than the static understanding. The triggering situation is given prominent importance in this interface.

Up until the 1980s, the view had stubbornly persisted that a compulsive character was the personality basis for the development of obsessive-compulsive disorder (Bürgy 2005a ). Kretschmer, Jasper, and Schneider had, however, already pointed out that sens Dive personality traits were a prerequisite of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Kretschmer writes in his book on “ Physique and Character ” in 1921: “The sensitive person is thinskinned, impressionable but restrained and processes experiences sustainably. He has a long-lasting hidden Effective tension, is ethically sensitive and ambitious, feeling unsure of himself, he tends to feelings of guilt and hides behind an asthenic façade a pro Bounced, if also inhibited wish to assert his own will” ( Kretschmer 1977: 183). In 1986 Lang extended the psychoanalytic concept of compulsive neurotic symptoms as repre Denting an unconscious form of conflict resolution by the addition, on a social level, of the concept of a compulsively neurotic person as an “inhibited rebel,”. These hy potheses are supported by the results of comorbidity studies which show that in 51–75% of cases of obsessive-compulsive disorders there is also a personality disorder from Clews ter C of the DSM-fourth classification. Cluster C can be described as follows: A tendency to be easily offended by criticism and rejection, the (p. 640) exaggeration of potential prob ems, continuous tension and anxiety, a feeling of helplessness and dependency, enormous separation anxieties, excessive conscientiousness, a lack of flexibility, and passive aggres ion.

The question remains, however, as to how symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder de velop on the basis of this personality typology. In the classical psychiatric literature there are two basic approaches to the genesis of compulsion. On the one hand, for authors like Kraepelin, Aschaffenburg, Störing, and v. Gebsattel, the focus is on the genesis of affect. In the other approach compulsion is seen as being a disorder of thought content and is therefore moved closer to delusion. This approach is found in the works of authors like Westphal, Binder, and Schneider (Bürgy 2005b). Freud was one of the first researchers who attempted to combine these two positions. In his 1909 work, “ Notes on a Case of Ob sessional Neurosis ” (Bemerkungen über Linen Fall von Zwangsneurose ), he described the primary battle between two strongly contradictory feelings, especially between love and The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person hate, which leads to strong feelings of insecurity, ambivalence, weakness of will, and to the creation of neurotic symptoms in the form of symbolic compulsive actions. As a sec ondary effect, the obsession becomes isolated from the affect so that in the case of oases chive-compulsive disorder virtually no affect is present. Binder felt that the cause of the start of compulsion resulted from a failure of integration and v. Gebsattel traced it back to the disintegration of affects. v. Gebsat tel describes in subtle casuistry the case of a man with a washing obsession who fails “to integrate the feeling of disgust into the structure of the person.” Affect and cognition are always closely associated with one another. Hoffman and Hofmann also stress the imper Dance of the intensity of feelings and the confusion between them at the start of the ill Bess. The person will, above all, experience affects such as pain, grief, loneliness, anxiety, disgust, and rage. In some of my works I have described the situation which triggers the obsessive-compulsive condition as follows: At the root of obsessive-compulsion the person feels a deeply anchored sense of insecurity and anxiety and the associated inner tension, and also has inadequately differentiated affects. By this I mean that the person has a poorly developed ability to identify, express, and commune ate affects. In a situation in which a person feels emotionally overwhelmed, there is a confusion of conflicting affects, which encloses the person within a vicious circle of feel Dings of powerlessness, helplessness, and isolation. These strong affects are attached to a biographically charged, external object in order to subdue the inner chaos, while compel chive actions, in addition, represent attempts to re-establish the control which has been lost. The strengthening of defenses against these, however, does not bring calm to the person but instead serves to further build up the obsessive-compulsive symptoms so that these do not stop (Bürgy 2005b).

This original confusion is countered by behavioral therapy, producing a therapeutic differ entiation of emotions, the establishment of a sense of reality, and the activation of the self-system which includes all the person’s previous experiences, feelings, convictions, and values, as well as the constitution of an active I-subject.

Case Study on Genetic Understanding Ms A. reported that her father himself also suffered from compulsions, for example, he filed everything “in a million different folders” and that he too dissociative identity disorder not let anyone else touch his (p. 641) washing. She said that when she was younger, if people dissociative identity disorder not behave the way he wanted them to he would react angrily and torment the person concerned. He had been jealous and controlling toward her mother and her mother had felt lonely and had cried a lot. Ms A. had therefore become her mother’s confidante very early on. She used to comfort her mother and had developed a keen sense for when there was about to be an argument between her mother and her father. She had always been oversensitive and able to tell when one of her brothers or sisters had a problem and even if something bad happened to someone. That was why she had the feeling that she was responsible for stressful situations and why she felt that she was at the mercy of these situations. When The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person she was asked if she had had any early symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder, she said that even as a child she had filled up her pockets with cash till receipts as these were important to her. She had also hoarded her clothes and could not bear to be parted from them. She could not bear the feelings that these objects were irretrievable, of being spa rated from them, nor the feelings of emptiness. Her brothers, aged twenty-three and Whir ty-one, were healthy but her sister, who was thirty-six, suffered from touch phobia.

Ms A. described the triggering situation for her current symptoms as follows: It had all begun with the death of the first of her grandmothers to die, her mother’s mother. She said that she had been very close to her grandmother and been with her at her death and had felt very guilty about her death. Her grandmother had had a stroke and after that Ms A. had visited her every day for months. She had tried to keep her grandmother alive by sending her thoughts and strength. She had felt that she was only allowed to think good thoughts and that she must not let her go. She said that she became increasingly afraid that she would lose her grandmother. She also had ever worsening mental images of her grandmother’s death in her head. She said that she noticeably lost the ability to control these thoughts. She said this had been Hell for her and represented an enormous respond sibility and increasing fear and guilt. Ms A. said that when her grandmother finally died, she still felt very close to her. This feeling comforted her. In the farewell room, however, she had once again experienced feelings of anxiety and guilt, that she had failed, and that she had killed her grandmother by her own thoughts. When she was pressed toward the coffin by the large numbers of people at her grandmother’s funeral, she felt a strong feel ing of disgust welling up in her. Her aunt had then also touched her hands which served to further increase her feeling of disgust. She reported that her feelings became com pletely confused and had increased to a “massive fear of being annihilated,” as though death could be passed on to her. This is why she had begun to wash everything. This had helped her to keep these feelings at a distance. She said the washing made the feelings subside until she no longer experienced herself, and she finally also became dissociated from her own body and then felt like a robot. She was embarrassed to talk about it and was afraid that people might laugh at her. She knew that her fears were much too farfetched.

Ms A. described the triggering situation for her current symptoms as follows: It had all begun with the death of the first of her grandmothers to die, her mother’s mother. She said that she had been very close to her grandmother and been with her at her death and had felt very guilty about her death. Her grandmother had had a stroke and after that Ms A. had visited her every day for months. She had tried to keep her grandmother alive by sending her thoughts and strength. She had felt that she was only allowed to think good thoughts and that she must not let her go. She said that she became increasingly afraid that she would lose her grandmother. She also had ever worsening mental images of her grandmother’s death in her head. She said that she noticeably lost the ability to control these thoughts. She said this had been Hell for her and represented an enormous respond sibility and increasing fear and guilt. Ms A. said that when her grandmother finally died, she still felt very close to her. This feeling comforted her. In the farewell room, however, she had once again experienced feelings of anxiety and guilt, that she had failed, and that she had killed her grandmother by her own thoughts. When she was pressed toward the coffin by the large numbers of people at her grandmother’s funeral, she felt a strong feel ing of disgust welling up in her. Her aunt had then also touched her hands which served to further increase her feeling of disgust. She reported that her feelings became com pletely confused and had increased to a “massive fear of being annihilated,” as though death could be passed on to her. This is why she had begun to wash everything. This had helped her to keep these feelings at a distance. She said the washing made the feelings subside until she no longer experienced herself, and she finally also became dissociated from her own body and then felt like a robot. She was embarrassed to talk about it and was afraid that people might laugh at her. She knew that her fears were much too farfetched.

Ms A. went on to report that it was also after this event that she had begun to clean and disinfect everything. She had tried to dispose of the material which was contaminated with disgust and to keep it away from her. This had developed into a situation in which she “lived in two worlds,” which she constantly had to keep apart from one another. She really could not stop all her cleaning tasks. She reported that she found it particularly dif ficult to separate herself emotionally from her parents and from her boyfriend. She felt that her compulsions would therefore also help to create this distance from them. She said that she was simply not able to carry so much ballast around with her. She also said that although she naturally (p. 642) wanted to lead a normal life, she dissociative identity disorder not know whether she would ever be able to give up this need to be separate from them.

The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person # The Hermeneutic Understanding The third level of understanding, the hermeneutic understanding, aims at highlighting the philosophical and anthropological dimension of meaning and sense of the symptoms of compulsion. This approach has the least amount of evidence in sensual experience. It is more interpretive and speculative, but it is able to combine symptoms described descrip Lively and genetically as if in a common bond with one another in regard to their mean ing.

The primary threatening aspect in compulsion is characterized by an inner state, which can be described as a confusion of affect including the fear of dissolution, a sense of in completeness, a threatening experience of disgust and depersonalization. v. Gebsattel at tempted to summarize all the different ways of experiencing threat and specified them, above all, as immobility, a tendency to remain in the same state, relative lack of emotion, severe isolation and a directionless, free-floating character. As a con sequence of the defensive aspects of this condition, the person develops an inability to complete actions. v. Gebsattel therefore describes the anthropological dimension of ob sessive-compulsive disorder as a discontinuation of a person’s personal development in time. Time and life come to a standstill and the future is switched off. v. Gebsattel de scribes the consequences of this disruption to personal development as follows: “For the obsessive-compulsive person, what has happened in the past does not take the form of a completed action, it assails him as something uncompleted and overwhelms him with symbols of impurity, dirtiness and death” (1954: 144). The standing still of time, with the associated loss of the future, leads to the theme of death in obsessive-compulsive Visor der.

In 1938, Straps published the autobiographical account of a female patient whose com pulsive washing developed from an original fear of death, which was only secondarily dis placed, and always in external respects, into the experience of disgust. In 1965, Skoog found unsettling death motifs in more than 70% of obsessive-compulsive pa taints who were specifically asked about this. And, in 1972, Schwidder found that the fear of a death which could occur at any time was the central fear of peo ple with obsessive-compulsive disorder. The topic of death is still im portent in current publications for people with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Coven tonal symbols of death, such as crosses, people in mourning clothes, hearses and Heme Aeries, etc. create a strong feeling of unease in people with obsessive-compulsive disorder as well as the magical expectation that a disaster will happen. The fear of decay, illness, and death, mixed with disgust is regularly hidden behind compulsive washing.

Probably the most intensive and most differentiated treatment of the death motif is that of the Göttingen psychiatrist Meyer. In Meyer’s opinion, the phobic element which al ready manifests itself in the initial phase of compulsive neurosis points to the avoidance of death, which is always immanent in life, and thus to what v. Wei'säOcker called a “life which is unloved”. Meyer classified obsessive-compulsive disorder as The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person being a thanatophobic neurosis and thus provided an interpretation which is also found in the structural-anthropological approach of Lang. Lang takes up Freud’s idea of (p. 643) the special importance of the death-wish in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Using the example of Shakespeare’s dramatic character Lady Macbeth, he develops the significance of compulsive washing in obsessive-compulsive disorder as a defense against guilt and death.

The fear of dying and death is to be found in many of the fears of an obsessive-compel chive: the fear of dead creatures, of corruptible matter, of dirt and dust, and the fear of anything which is definitive, unrepeatable, or unpredictable in life. And this fear of death is also hidden behind hopeless and exhausting battles, extreme caution, care, and vii lance. These security systems are used to fend off a more primal experience, which can not be fully relinquished in the present moment with all its dangers and possibilities.

Lived Time It is initially possible to detect the person’s change in their experience of time from their symptoms. Control actions, repetitive actions, ordering, washing, and cleaning, as well as collecting and hoarding, all represent the struggle of sensitive people against the disinter ration of their affects or emotions, against feelings of disgust, and against their expert Once of incompleteness and emptiness. The compulsive symptoms slow down lived time. In the most extreme cases, this leads to patients coming to a complete standstill and to attempts to return to the past. The obsessive-compulsive person’s own experience of life cannot be freed from feelings of guilt, sin, and failure. His ability to develop his own op portunities in life, to be dynamic and creative, and to develop bold plans or Utopian ideals for the future is inhibited. He is less active in taking up and shaping the possibilities for growth and development which are present in his own life. His fear of death is over whelming. Faced with the fact of his own death one day, he experiences a fear of dying without really ever having properly lived. This explains why symbols of death come to have such a magical significance for him. He feels that the possibilities in his own life are being controlled by an unpredictable fate, rather than by his own life and his life is con scantly under threat of being choked off by a plethora of precautionary and security mea Cures, which he takes to protect himself.

Lived Space The obsessive-compulsive person lives in a confined space and between two worlds, be tween contamination and normality, control and behaving in a natural way, egocentrism and responsibility/guilt. He is highly sensitive and irritable, and loses the feeling for him self quickly because of other people. He also needs protection and space for retreating from other people in order to be able to control the demands placed on him by the out side world. His inner and outer worlds are inadequately separated from each other. He quickly begins to experience the outside world as being threatening and he soon becomes convinced that he has damaged someone in the outside world without anyone having no iced it. He experiences his own incompleteness as well as feelings of emptiness, guilt, The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person and disgust. His feelings of incompleteness and emptiness show that his sense of self is overwhelmed in his contact with the environment. Here the feelings of guilt are linked to his relationship to the needs of others and feelings of disgust describe fears that he may be penetrated by an alien (p. 644) and disgusting substance, that the obsessive-compel chive person will lose themselves, become totally disintegrated, and die off. Ms. A lives in her own private and smallest possible space, surrounded by contaminated materials. From time to time she seeks to break out, to go on holiday, and to seek out places other than that in which she experiences compulsions and outside of her bland normality. It is then that she feels really free and alive. She then has no more thoughts of death and her fear of death.

Lived Body The obsessive-compulsive person’s sensitivity and irritability in their own experience of themselves also leads to a fear of close physical contact or contamination. This repre Bents a fear of being penetrated by a foreign substance, that one’s self will be lost, dis solved, and drained away. The obsessive-compulsive person will generally maintain phys cal distance from others and fears contamination and defilement. He needs time to build up trust and a sense of security. He finds it easier to establish feelings of closeness and wanting to make contact with others from within himself, than to let himself be moved by something which is external to him. His weak sense of self makes him maintain a physical distance from others in order to keep the forces of death and disintegration under con tool. Ms A. rarely tried to break out and escape from her state of torpidity. She dissociative identity disorder some times, however, seek to do this by dancing but she preferred to dance alone and, in doing so, she maintained her distance from others.

Lived Otherness The obsessive-compulsive person normally likes to bury himself in his everyday routine, in normality and inconspicuousness. He does not, however, initially experience the new, the unknown, and the unusual as being contaminated. It is only when he gets closer to others and, in particular, in his relationships that his “otherness” can be fully seen. It is only when he gets close to people and things that the fears of contamination, depersonalize son, and disintegration, and of facing a deadly threat develop. He always keeps his dis Dance, remains hidden and aloof in order to remain alive and to maintain a barrier be tween himself and death. He seeks to bring all those close to him under his control and thus, in effect, to neutralize them. This means that the obsessive-compulsive person’s own individuality as expressed, in particular, in spontaneous gestures, is at risk of being hid den or completely lost.

Case Study on Hermeneutic Understanding In much of Ms A.’s experience there is the fear of finitude and death. In reply to the ques son about what the death meant for her, Ms A. said for her, death was more important in The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person relation to other people; she thought about their deaths and her own responsibility and guilt for them. She felt that she should not be allowed to harm anyone through her bad thoughts. This was why the idea of “the last thought” was so important to her, particular ly on New Year’s (p. 645) Eve, because it was something which could not be corrected, and that time is passing, year after year. She said that for her there was something like a battle to make sure she had “the right last thought,” and this was associated with guilt about failure if it was not “the correct thought.” She felt that with each passing year she was getting further away from the paradise where everything had once been good. Her mother had told her that at the time of her birth she had not wanted to come out of the womb. She often felt as if she would rather be in a “Wonderland” where everything is good and where, in her opinion, there would be no more pain or guilt.

She said that she hated cemeteries and undertakers’ businesses and that she always got sick if she had to drive past them. Crucifixes and crosses always made her feel guilty about the things which she dissociative identity disorder wrong and about her bad thoughts. Crosses reminded her of her blasphemous thoughts, such as, for example, about peeing in the church, and of how imperfect she is and that there had been one person living on the earth who had managed to live his life without being guilty of anything.

Ms A. had originally also sought to prevent the death of her grandmother, magically by energy transfer, as well as by controlling her destructive thoughts. When her grandmoth er died, she began to experience feelings of a loss of control, guilt, and despair. Her fear of the death of her grandmother, and the initial feelings of closeness to her grandmother after her death, became transformed into a threat that her grandmother’s death could be transposed onto her. She suddenly began to experience fear of the “disgusting penetrate ing substance,” of disintegration and oblivion. She tried to control death and keep it at a distance by her never-ending washing and checking compulsions and by separating off her compulsive worlds from the real world. It is clear that the trigger situation, the fear of her own death, was hiding behind the concern and anxiety about her grandmother. This thantophobia accordingly underlies the disturbance side and the compulsive actions represent a protective defense mechanism against this.

Conclusion We first undertook to describe the structure of compulsion, using the static understand ing. The disturbance or threat side was reviewed, together with the underlying feelings of guilt, incompleteness, emptiness, and disgust, which follow the never-ending attempts to neutralize it on the defending and coping side, including the experience of depersonalize son. The case study relating to Ms A. shows, in particular, the interpersonal dimension of feelings of responsibility and guilt, the fear that the boundaries between the inside and the outside are lost and that the idea of killing someone becomes real. The defense against frightening perceptions is performed by completing checking actions, which mini Size fear and lead to depersonalization. The separating off of compulsive worlds creates further interpersonal distance.

The Life-World of the Obsessive-Compulsive Person The genetic understanding highlights the lack of differentiation of the affects, as well as the inner tension, which are both rooted in a personality which is deeply prone to being unsettled and is at the same time inhibited, and its biographical development. The person’s sense of being overwhelmed in the trigger situation leads to confusion of con flirting affects, which build up in a vicious circle of powerlessness, helplessness, and iso Cation, and become (p. 646) attached to a biographically charged external object. The de fending against the object does not lead to any feeling of calm but instead reinforces the symptoms of compulsion. In Ms A. we find a highly irritable personality who, because of her biographical development, is oriented toward the perception of other people and one which is also characterized by her particular feelings of responsibility and guilt. In the trigger situation, her sense of responsibility for the life of a particularly close person reaches such a pitch that the actual death of that person leads to confusion of affect and fear of dissolution. Her own fear of death is triggered and projected onto the “disgusting substance” and onto the washing and checking compulsions, and, together with the spa ration of these worlds of compulsion from the real world, represent defenses against this fear.

The hermeneutical understanding therefore portrays the fear of death and defense against it, thus highlighting the basic anthropological dimension of obsessive-compulsive disorder and its significance and meaning. The thanatophobic obsessive-compulsive per son attempts to stop time and impermanence and thus rapidly falls victim to the pressure of his passing and unloved life. Ms A. experiences her fear of death above all in the trig ger situation in which her compulsive coping strategies are combined to form a meaning ful unity. She is confronted everywhere with impermanence, her hopeless struggle, and her insurmountable feelings of guilt. For her, time is running out, paradise was lost through her birth and it becomes ever more distant with each passing year of her life.

The disturbance of the threatening side of the compulsion therefore permeates all levels of her understanding up to her fear of death, which becomes ever more apparent, and which is not significantly ameliorated by living a meaningful life. Static, genetic, and hermeneutic dimensions of understanding can be associated with, and related to one an other in the hermeneutic circle. It is clear from the case of Ms A. that she is really trying to complete her task of personal development, which is bound up in compulsion: To differ entiate herself from others, to delegate responsibility where appropriate, to live her own life, to accept what is irreplaceable in the course of time, as well as the threat of death, and to reintegrate the separated worlds of her normal everyday life. This creates both an analytical ordering of the obsessive-compulsive symptoms as well as their synthetic com bination in the totality and purposefulness of the person, which, according to Jasper, al ways remains open and incommensurable. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK This chapter explores the fundamental anthropological features of the hysterical person. Two essential elements for the understanding of the hysterical persons are described: re National hypo-sufficiency and anthropological fragmentation. Relational hypo-sufficiency reveals the central characteristic of hysterical interpersonality, namely the subjugation of the I of the hysterical person to the other. Relational hypo-sufficiency is understood in terms of its temporality, spatiality, corporeality, and social identity. Anthropological frag mentation has puzzle corporeality as its main characteristic. In it, the body of the hysteria cal person is transformed into a passive stage of heteronomous life-projects. The chapter draws points of contrast with other disorders and sets out a dialectics of hysterical xis Fence, presenting a fruitful face of this life-world.

Keywords: hysteria, hysterical person, interpersonality, temporality, spatiality, corporeality, social identity, dialed ics of existence, relational hypo-sufficiency, anthropological fragmentation “The passion of hysteria is only a name, yet diverse and uncountable are the ways it encompasses.”

Galen ( De loss affectibus (8.413.15–414.16))

Introduction HYSTERIA has a unique position within psychopathology, as it seems to harbor impreci ions and conceptual indecision of this discipline. Its definition was never consensual, and the flaws in its understanding reveal much of the epistemological avatars that have guided psychopathology, and consequently psychology and psychiatry, throughout this century and the previous one.

Throughout history, the concept of hysteria has been connected to a range of behaviors and psychological states marked by drama, mystery, or falsity. Hysteria was The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria understood as a plurality of somatic manifestations that were difficult to decipher, rang ing from exaggerations in emotional expression, gestures, and mimicry, to paresthesia, in voluntary movements, or even the complete loss of consciousness associated with consul chive seizures. This rich symptomatic expression of suffering and physical symptoms, com Dined with the absence of anatomical and pathophysiological markers, has established lasting controversies around its conception. In nineteenth-century France, where its mod ern roots are found, the concept of hysteria already evoked disputes over its legitimacy. While Chariot and the Salpétrière school were striving to demonstrate the relevance of the construct, the Nancy school, represented by Bernheim, argued that the state of the Salpétrière hysterics was due to suggestion and dissociative identity disorder not exist outside of that circumstance.

Such discussions of the nature of hysteria have never been closed in psychiatry. However, after the development of psychoanalytic theory, they seem to have given way to a consed sus. (p. 650) Hysteria was central to the development of Freud’s theory, and his under standing of the phenomenon, supported by the postulate of the unconscious, eventually prevailed in culture.

The psychoanalytic orientation also guided the official classifications of psychiatry until the 1980s. At that time, the desire to build a definitive and absolutely reliable classifica son system within the field of psychiatry emerged with vigor. In this context, the errant construct of hysteria seemed problematic. Its troubled course in the field of psychiatry, on one hand, denounced the fragility of the scientific ambitions mentioned above and, on the other, gave way to an understanding too closely connected to psychodynamic theories. Thus, with the stroke of a pen, hysteria was banned from official psychiatric classifica sons after 1980 with the publication of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders —DSM-third.

If we briefly revisit the changes throughout the various editions of the manual, we will ob serve that in DSM-I the category closest to the hysterical phenomena ap paired with the denomination of conversion reaction. In DSM-second, it was grouped under the new diagnosis of hysterical neurosis, echoing the concept of hysteria of the psychodynamic theories. In DSM-third, the new category becomes So matoform disorders, divided into several sub-categories (somatization disorder, undiffer entiated somatoform disorder, pain disorder, and somatoform disorder not otherwise specified). In DSM-fourth, the modifications focused on changes in the list of cri Beria for inclusion in the category of somatoform disorders. In its most recent edition, DSM-5, several changes were made: the category of conversion disorder was delimited with more detailed criteria; the category of somatic symptoms disorder (SSD) is created, combining those of somatization disorder and somatization disorder not other wise specified; the pain disorder and body dysmorphic disorder sub-categories were re moved and hypochondriasis was renamed as illness anxiety disorder and redefined. This DSM-5 proposal, in line with the principles of DSM-third, spec Dying subtypes of a larger category—whose gestalt could be compared with hysteria—was The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria not immune to controversies either, especially regarding the coherence of these divisions as parts of a whole.

This historical “decline” of hysteria in the field of psychiatry has diverse interpretations. Micale notes that the diagnosis of hysteria and its various formulations underwent a radical process of nosological remodeling in the twentieth century, and would be disap pairing if not entirely gone. Neither historians nor clinicians, however, agree on the dis appearance of hysteria. Lewis considers hysteria one of those diseases “which has had a sentence of death passed upon them more than once, yet they obsti Lately survive” (1975: 9). There is evidence that it is the medical interest in this entity— inhabiting “the no-man’s land between these two specialties [neurology and psychiatry]” ( Stone et al. 2008: 12)—that has disappeared, not the phenomenon itself. Thus, assuming the clinician’s insistence on recognizing the existence of hysteria in di verse contexts and in a manner impervious to the current epistemological dispositions, it is necessary to seek a methodological framework that will give it anthropological support. Although the developments of the classical notion of hysteria are marked by a persistent conceptual indefinition, an essential core of the lived hysterical world can be identified in a consistent manner in the clinical experience.

The understanding of hysteria as an anthropological unit can only come about through the investigation of the essential structures of human existence. Thus, it is within the framework (p. 651) of phenomenological psychopathology, the most advanced modality of psychopathological science, that are found the methodological tools for a deep psychopathological dissection of the hysterical person.

Throughout the chapter, we will trace a course demonstrating the essential unity of the fundamental structures of the hysterical human existence, unfolded in its main anthropo logical conditions of possibility: temporality, spatiality, embodiment, and identity. The ad jective “anthropological” indicates that the level at which this phenomenon occurs is not that of the integration of the self, that is, the ontological level, which is necessary for the personality to be constituted as an ontological unity in time and space and for it to have a competent body to express life as meaning (Merleau-Monty 1945/2012). The ontological level “determines existence in general” ( Binswanger 1958: 191) and precedes and fun sons as a condition of possibility of the anthropological level. Characteristics of hysteria do not take place in the constitution of the self, but in the loss of a healthy balance of its transcendental anthropological proportions. To better elucidate hysteria, we will compare the hysterical condition with other conditions that may be con fused with it, or that, by being opposite, may aid in its elucidation. Finally, we will briefly present a dialectical perspective of the phenomenology of hysteria, which takes into ac count the fundamental ambiguity of human existence.

The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria # The Phenomenological Understanding of the # Essential Core of Hysteria The act of phenomenological understanding seeks to reveal fundamental elements of the existential reality that are stable enough to be identified in other similar cases in patio logical or non-pathological situations. This essential core must necessarily be found in 1 every phenomenological manifestation studied. In the case of hysteria, from what we have seen previously, this identification gains even greater relevance, since the multiplici ty of symptoms of the condition casts doubt even on its anthropological and psychopath logical validity. The following reflections on the hysterical essence observe a criterion of descending importance for its understanding.

Interpersonality: Relational Hypo-Sufficiency The best-known essential definition of hysteria goes back to Jasper, formulated in his fa Nous sentence: “... crave to appear, both to themselves and others, as more than they are and to experience more than they are ever capable of” (1997: 443). This definition, never entirely rejected by other phenomenological psychopathologists, contains much of what is meant (p. 652) by hysteria, although the Jaspersian conception of phenomenology has been limited to the descriptive layer of experience, leaving out the investigation of the structuring pre-reflexive layer. The importance given by the author of Gen real Psychopathology to “appear before the other” is fundamental to the understanding of 2 hysterical experiences. It is by means of a more detailed analysis of this definition that we will arrive at the central function of otherness in the constitution of hysteria.

Hysteria is based on an experience of imbalance between the poles of interpersonality. There is an anthropological disproportion between the importance of 3 the pole of the I and that of the pole of the other, with priority given to otherness. Hysterical experiences have as their fundamental presupposition the existence of an ex tremely powerful, we may even say, omnipotent other. The exaggerated expressiveness of the hysterics or their typical dramaticity is based, in contrast with what Jasper thought, on this fragility of the I, exposed in an excessive way to the existed ital supremacy of the other. As the other manifests herself, in the eyes of the hysteric, in a totipotent way, and shows herself unshakable in her self-sufficiency, a mobilization is re queered from the hysterical person to remove the other from indifference and draw her to herself. With this, the hysterical person seeks to achieve some balance for his insufficient I. The central relevance of this interpersonal characteristic led Schneider, in his classic work Clinical Psychopathology, to reject the use of the term hysteria for one of his psy chopaths, giving preference to the more explicit and descriptive notion of “Psychopaths in need of esteem”.

Hysterical relational hypo-sufficiency also supports the fact that the hysterical existence can take many forms, following the general lines of culture and the behavioral possibili ties in the social and historical moment, being sometimes an expression of existential The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria protest (Jonckheere 2009: 71). As a result, when hysteria enters the field of interest in psychopathology, it was a mainly female clinical manifestation, provoked by a supposedly repressed sexual urge. However, phenomenologically, one should not understand a mete anise of repression of female sexual desire—or even of any other desire—as the basis for the anthropological understanding of hysteria because hysteria is also a masculine an thropological condition. The logic is the reverse: hysteria seeks to pre-reflexively identify themes, identities, and behaviors that are capable of producing movement and attention in the other. If, in a particular relationship, in a specific cultural period, such as the end of the nineteenth century, the sexual theme is the most powerful in the mobilization of the other, that will be the theme to gain hysterical existence. If, in another relation, the trigger of possible mobilization is different, hysteria takes on anoth er of its thousand forms.

In the life-world of hysteria, the existential movement is the mobilization of everything that can remove the hysterical I from its position of inferiority and hypo-sufficiency, grant ing it, even if falsely, a position of centrality. Thus, hysterical consciousness is a con sciousness of exaggeration, theatricality, and staging. It is precisely in (p. 653) the theater that the human dramas are emphasized through a caricatural ex pressiveness. In order for the central themes of human life to be detached from the mo notony of everyday life, they must be clothed with a pretense that is paradoxically the af formation of truth.

In the life-world of hysteria, the existential movement is the mobilization of everything that can remove the hysterical I from its position of inferiority and hypo-sufficiency, grant ing it, even if falsely, a position of centrality. Thus, hysterical consciousness is a con sciousness of exaggeration, theatricality, and staging. It is precisely in (p. 653) the theater that the human dramas are emphasized through a caricatural ex pressiveness. In order for the central themes of human life to be detached from the mo notony of everyday life, they must be clothed with a pretense that is paradoxically the af formation of truth.

The relational hypo-sufficiency of the I determines that the insertion of the hysterical per son in the world depends too much on the meanings and values that the other imprints on the world, or that the hysteric believes the other imprints on the world. From this derives the seduction typically associated with hysteria, since to seduce means to seize and to of fer, immediately and expressively, that which, for the other, has value. Another proof of this anthropological subjugation of the hysterical I to the meaning imposed by the other is hysterical suggestibility. The hyper-valuation of the other also underlies the cases of fantastic pseudology. In these, a representative fantasy, originally aimed at capturing the attention of the other, is taken to ultimate consequences, dominating the weakened I of the hysteric, who comes to believe in his own mental constructions. This belief in the unreality of facts is radically different from a schizophrenic delusion, be cause of the existential dimension in which they occur. If schizo phrenic pathologies occur at the ontological level of the constitution of the self, the experiences of the hysterical world are limited to the anthropological level, in which the primary constitution of the self is not compromised. Likewise, hysterical alter Cations, even when assuming supposedly psychotic characteristics, continue to have the other as a tacit end to which their clinical manifestations turn. Hysteria is subjugated to the sense emanating externally from the values and desires of the other, and as such is capable of capturing an integral sense, unlike what occurs in schizophre nia. To return to the classic example of nineteenth-century female hysteria, from the per spective of incipient psychoanalysis: hysteria resulted from the impossibility of conscious emergence of a morally intolerable psychic content. Now, for a content to be—even if un consciously, within the psychodynamic model—intolerable, it must already be fully mean The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria ingful in advance. It is, therefore, legitimate to say that meaning floods the hysteric. Hys Beria is the flooding of a meaning which has as primary source the meaning of the world given by the other. Consequently, from the anthropo-phenomenological point of view, it is illegitimate to speak of hysterical psychosis. More precisely, as the au Thor points out, the severe alterations of hysteria must be considered as pseudopsy hoses.

We have seen how hysteria is based on the domination of the I by the excess of meaning coming from the other. This existential condition can also be understood as the expires ion of a singular heteronomy. Klaus coined the term heteronomy to define the doming son of melancholic existence by the rules of the collectivity; for him, melancholia would be in opposition to hysteria, although this clear anthropological distinction can be lost in a purely semiological analysis. The melancholic would be het eronomous because she would allow herself to be entirely determined by the rules of the collectivity, incorporating the totality of her I into the collectively determined role. There is nothing to contradict in this deep perception of melancholy in its relations with the oth er and the collectivity. However, it is worth noting what Klaus means by heteronomy. For the author, the meaning determining the melancholic experience is the meaning of the norms and social roles established by culture. In this sense, for the melancholic, both her own I and the I of others are pre-reflexively perceived as heteronomous, since both must be governed by a norm that, established by the collective, transcends both. Perhaps it would be more accurate, in this case, to speak in terms of collective heteronomy, since the notion of heteronomy in itself can (p. 654) be more comprehensive. Hysteria also ap pears to be characterized by a different modality of heteronomy. In it, heteronomy seems to be singular, that is, the other that is considered pre-reflexively is an exclusive, person alized, private, and heroic individual, representing a power that goes beyond convention al social norms. This excellence by which the other is experienced by the hysteric makes her primarily the object of passion, the typical feeling of sublime and irreproducible Bela tionships. The uniqueness of the heteronomy of the hysteric other makes the hysterical person normally interested in persons holding or presumed to hold positions of power. The other is intended by the hysterical person as unique in its meaning-giving power. This characteristic also makes the hysterical person different from the maniac, with which he could be confused, in his contempt for social conventions. The manic person, however, has a strong, egocentric ego that addresses the world, whereas in hysteria, as we have seen, the I is frail and hypo-sufficient.

We have seen how hysteria is based on the domination of the I by the excess of meaning coming from the other. This existential condition can also be understood as the expires ion of a singular heteronomy. Klaus coined the term heteronomy to define the doming son of melancholic existence by the rules of the collectivity; for him, melancholia would be in opposition to hysteria, although this clear anthropological distinction can be lost in a purely semiological analysis. The melancholic would be het eronomous because she would allow herself to be entirely determined by the rules of the collectivity, incorporating the totality of her I into the collectively determined role. There is nothing to contradict in this deep perception of melancholy in its relations with the oth er and the collectivity. However, it is worth noting what Klaus means by heteronomy. For the author, the meaning determining the melancholic experience is the meaning of the norms and social roles established by culture. In this sense, for the melancholic, both her own I and the I of others are pre-reflexively perceived as heteronomous, since both must be governed by a norm that, established by the collective, transcends both. Perhaps it would be more accurate, in this case, to speak in terms of collective heteronomy, since the notion of heteronomy in itself can (p. 654) be more comprehensive. Hysteria also ap pears to be characterized by a different modality of heteronomy. In it, heteronomy seems to be singular, that is, the other that is considered pre-reflexively is an exclusive, person alized, private, and heroic individual, representing a power that goes beyond convention al social norms. This excellence by which the other is experienced by the hysteric makes her primarily the object of passion, the typical feeling of sublime and irreproducible Bela tionships. The uniqueness of the heteronomy of the hysteric other makes the hysterical person normally interested in persons holding or presumed to hold positions of power. The other is intended by the hysterical person as unique in its meaning-giving power. This characteristic also makes the hysterical person different from the maniac, with which he could be confused, in his contempt for social conventions. The manic person, however, has a strong, egocentric ego that addresses the world, whereas in hysteria, as we have seen, the I is frail and hypo-sufficient.

Rovaletti examines in depth this singularity of the other as experienced in hysteria, of which a heroic and therefore painful role is required. She affirms that “pure and simple desire would humiliate [the hysteric] and cause her horror, but on the other hand she would find no charm in respect that was only respect” (1999a: 6). The other, endowed of excessive importance by the hysterical person must, at the same time, be restricted in her role. On one hand, if she allows herself to freely express her desire over the hysterical person, she is repelled by having acted unilaterally, transforming the hysterical person into an object. On the other hand, an integral respect, by which the hysterical per son is treated as a single being and endowed with her own desire, disqualifies the Bela The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria son. Respect, in a way, mitigates the intensity and especially the effectiveness of the other’s power. The hysterical I needs to identify its totipotent other as a continuous pow er, as a Nietzschean superman beyond morality. The hysterical person needs the other in a way that is perfectly pictured in the famous phrase quoted by Simone de Beauvoir, echoing a familiar one: “I would like giants and all I find is men” (2011: 417). Thus, an in soluble paradox marks the relations of the hysterical I with its other. The Nietzschean hero demanded by the hysterical person—and in which she is transformed as a reflection —is regulated by a mixture of strength and candor, practically impossible to achieve. It is as if hysterical seduction needed to invoke the heroism of the other to be protected by it. However, to do so and attain its full protection, it needs to know the other in her extreme limits. The typical case of this situation is the hysterical erotic seduction in which the hys terical person does not have an effective sexual purpose. Seduction serves as certification for the other to be able to desire deeply, reducing the hysterical person to the condition of an object, but at the same time maintaining a position of respect in which the hysterical I is embraced in its frailties. This paradox of hysterical relationships, as you can imagine, is at the root of many relational difficulties.

Another factor hindering the establishment of in-depth interpersonal relationships is hys terical immaturity, given by the continued state of hypo-sufficiency and interpersonal dis proportion. The maturity of the personality is based on a presupposed possibility of at tributing to any person the same existential potentials and limitations that the own sub Sect has, in which the relational poles are able to alternate their value according to the context. In the case of hysteria, as the I fixates itself on a less-value condition if compared to others of which it depends to exist (or from which it cannot free itself), it is not cope tent to carry out the alternation leading to maturity, preventing its consciousness from living the experiences that arise from this alternation.

(p. 655) Thus, Effectively, the hysteric is dominated by immature feelings, often taken as “childish,” and which determine, as a reflection on the other, attitudes of discontent and even irritation. Usually idealized by the hysterical person, the excessive value of the other leaves the impression of being based on false and even invasive feelings. The impression of sentimental falseness that the hysterical person promotes originates in the exaggera son that each affection or feeling contains, precisely because they are oriented to the mo bilization of the other. A state of subjugation can result from this interpersonal hypo-suffix ciency, causing hysterical relations to sometimes assume a perverse face. Perversity as such, however, in which subjugation is rooted in the desire to nullify the other, lies at the opposite pole of hysteria. The hysterical person just seeks to keep the other powerful in a state of attention and availability.

For this reason, the positional exaggeration conferred by the hysteric on the other must also merit investigation from the experiences lived by this other by means of Effective res onance. Effective resonance is an indispensable tool for a diagnosis, as ad Located by Minkowski and his notion of “diagnostic par pénération”. To the exp riential exaggeration of the hysteric corresponds a discomfort in the other, experienced, more often than not, as an invasion of her privacy or an outrage to her authentic avail The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria ability. Often within a relationship, the hysterical person seeks to go beyond the limits de termined by social conventions and attract the other into a zone of intimacy, many times with the proposal of relational themes of embarrassing content or performing acts of evi dent seduction. The embarrassment—or irritation and disbelief—occasionally experienced by the partners in their relations with hysterical people is the corresponding Effective face of the interpersonal pressure that the hysterical person places upon them. Hysteria is a dramatic scene requiring the active participation of the observer, usually invading his personal availability. A hysterical interpersonality is a unilateral decree, dictating a full and intense form of relationship—often without the assumption of the intimacy that is es sential to a relationship. Occasional intense feelings, produced in the interpersonal Bela tionship involving the hysterical person can have a flavor of inauthenticity, as already pointed out by Jasper and Klaus (2007 ). This inauthenticity presupposes the in ability of the hysterical feeling to actually touch the other. The hysterical person always falls short of herself, exalting her states and themes of consciousness to imitate a Bela tonal equality that cannot be attained. This hysterical sentimentality may occasionally seem to the inattentive observer or an observer who is only concerned with the descrip Dive layer of behavior as an inflation of the I—they “appear,... to themselves more than they are...” (Jasper 1997: 443). However, a more comprehensive analysis accurately identifies the opposite state: the apparently narcissistic experiences of hysterical vanity lie in phenomenological compensation, a mechanism aimed at real Incing the inequality in which it exists, and that drives its impotent I to live near frag mentation as we shall see below. Strictly speaking, the hysterical person does not believe or disbelieve in herself, but is dominated by a set of feelings or behaviors that end up op pressing her to such a degree that it no longer makes sense to measure the situation in terms of belief or disbelief, truth or lie, authenticity or inauthenticity.

Temporality Given that relational hypo-sufficiency is the essential anthropological core of hysteria, temporality is characterized by the presence of the other as the attracting and conduct ing pole of (p. 656) experience. Thus, temporality in hysterical existences is usually marked by the preponderance of elements connected to the present. Since what matters is the other, temporality is determined by a constant updating of the life-world, deepen dent on the presence or absence of the other. Every time there is a change of the other with whom the hysterical person relates, there is a re-updating of parts of her personality, making her unstable. This instability is born of an excessive valence of the present, since the hysterical person lives “unhindered” from the elements of retention of the past and the indeterminacies of the future. This is the aspect of temporality that can best meet the impositions of hysterical interpersonality. It is important to notice that, although there is a preponderance of the present, we are not faced with a constitutive change of temporal ty, or a disintegration of lived time, that is typical of schizophrenia. The ex aggerated relevance of the present can justify possible substance abuses and other be Saviors marked by a fleeting and volatile instant. ability. Often within a relationship, the hysterical person seeks to go beyond the limits de termined by social conventions and attract the other into a zone of intimacy, many times with the proposal of relational themes of embarrassing content or performing acts of evi dent seduction. The embarrassment—or irritation and disbelief—occasionally experienced by the partners in their relations with hysterical people is the corresponding Effective face of the interpersonal pressure that the hysterical person places upon them. Hysteria is a dramatic scene requiring the active participation of the observer, usually invading his personal availability. A hysterical interpersonality is a unilateral decree, dictating a full and intense form of relationship—often without the assumption of the intimacy that is es sential to a relationship. Occasional intense feelings, produced in the interpersonal Bela tionship involving the hysterical person can have a flavor of inauthenticity, as already pointed out by Jasper and Klaus (2007 ). This inauthenticity presupposes the in ability of the hysterical feeling to actually touch the other. The hysterical person always falls short of herself, exalting her states and themes of consciousness to imitate a Bela tonal equality that cannot be attained. This hysterical sentimentality may occasionally seem to the inattentive observer or an observer who is only concerned with the descrip Dive layer of behavior as an inflation of the I—they “appear,... to themselves more than they are...” (Jasper 1997: 443). However, a more comprehensive analysis accurately identifies the opposite state: the apparently narcissistic experiences of hysterical vanity lie in phenomenological compensation, a mechanism aimed at real Incing the inequality in which it exists, and that drives its impotent I to live near frag mentation as we shall see below. Strictly speaking, the hysterical person does not believe or disbelieve in herself, but is dominated by a set of feelings or behaviors that end up op pressing her to such a degree that it no longer makes sense to measure the situation in terms of belief or disbelief, truth or lie, authenticity or inauthenticity.

Temporality Given that relational hypo-sufficiency is the essential anthropological core of hysteria, temporality is characterized by the presence of the other as the attracting and conduct ing pole of (p. 656) experience. Thus, temporality in hysterical existences is usually marked by the preponderance of elements connected to the present. Since what matters is the other, temporality is determined by a constant updating of the life-world, deepen dent on the presence or absence of the other. Every time there is a change of the other with whom the hysterical person relates, there is a re-updating of parts of her personality, making her unstable. This instability is born of an excessive valence of the present, since the hysterical person lives “unhindered” from the elements of retention of the past and the indeterminacies of the future. This is the aspect of temporality that can best meet the impositions of hysterical interpersonality. It is important to notice that, although there is a preponderance of the present, we are not faced with a constitutive change of temporal ty, or a disintegration of lived time, that is typical of schizophrenia. The ex aggerated relevance of the present can justify possible substance abuses and other be Saviors marked by a fleeting and volatile instant.

The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria Spatiality Spatiality is the transcendental framework fundamental to the existential movement and the understanding of the hysterical essence. The hysterical movement in the world is based on situations that, from the spatial point of view, are marked by a) Centrality-peripherality. The hysterical person divides the lived space in terms of the dialectic centrality-peripherality. Hysterical relations always occur as a move Bent in which the center must necessarily be occupied by someone who determines a peripheral position to the other. As we have seen above, in a deeper level of anally sis, the other will always be the center of experience, situated on a stage of maxi mum visibility and value. However, the above-mentioned anthropological mechanism of phenomenological compensation makes the hysterical person deceptively appear to occupy the relational center. This vicarious occupation occurs through the produce son of intense emotions, the elevation of the colors of the emotions contained in an interrelational act, and is based, according to Blankenburg, on the need to overcome failures in the constitution of the I.

b) Anthropological distance. Hysteria is an experience of primordial distance, of in capacity for a true approach. Distance is the matrix that allows the scenic visibility of the hysterical person. The hysterical person does not base her relationships on an approach by which a fertile relationship is consolidated into a dual unity. On the con tarry, the heroic other of the hysteric must be kept at a distance, just so that her heroism is not reduced to human banality. The strength with which the hysterical person depends anthropologically on her heroic other is sustained by the distance maintained from the other. The visuality of hysterical behavior, its mannerisms, sens mental affectations, and extroversion, eventually depend on a distance for their ef festiveness. For this reason, the romantic and idealized passion is the most charac teristic feeling of the hysterical person. Romantic passion occurs in the absence of the beloved object, in its distance in time (the idealization of lost and impossible loves, for example) and in space (the romanticization of other cultures or societies, in which one could find a heroic person to love). The occasional excessive approxima son of the hysteric with the other, leading to intimacy, could remove the brightness of the relationship.

(p. 657) Embodiment Embodiment will also serve the anthropological core of hysteria. Thus, corporeality tends to serve as a tool for expression and compensation of this fundamental core. Hysterical intensity, understood as compensation for the fundamental hypo-sufficiency of the I, can be well expressed in the domains of the body. The exaggeration of the hysteric can be marked, for example, by subordination to the dictates of fashion and by the excessive use of corporal expression, reaching, in more intense cases, a condition of mannerism. It is an instrumentalized body and excessively placed as a function of the eyes of the other. For this reason, the bodily complaints of the hysterical person tend to be indeterminate and changeable, varying according to desires perceived in the other. The embodiment of the hysterical person is traversed more by passive suffering The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria than by active elaboration. Physical suffering appears in chronic pain, fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue, etc., or in excessive care for the body (e.g. rigorous diets, or an intense routine of exhausting physical exercise, aiming at becoming a perfect object of desire). Both the painful embodiment and that which seeks perfection can remove the existence of its own authenticity.

Social Identity In hysteria, the way the I relates to its partial identities is marked by detachment. Klaus examined the hysterical mode of existence from the point of view of the dialectic between the I and its identity. Following a Sartrean perspective, he argues that the define ing factor of the hysterical person is her low adherence to social identities. As opposed to the melancholic, who clings exaggeratedly to her partial identities, becoming hypernom ic, the hysterical person adheres only superficially and tangentially to the partial identi ties, becoming hyponomic. The hysterical person is able to understand the social roles at her disposal, but she cannot keep up with them. The hysteric easily takes two paths, that of transience and that of deformity.

i. Hysterical hyponomy makes each identity role dominant in consciousness for a short time, soon being replaced by another. This is why the hysterical person seems to cry convulsively in one moment to, immediately after, faced with another relation al situation, laugh comfortably, leaving the observer with the impression of deceit.

This is not a question of the falsification of feelings, but of their transience. The ex cessive rapidity of their succession causes each of them to be experienced superfi sally. This superficiality may reach such a point that the hysterical person itself is no longer able to control the role it plays; in these situations, the hyponomic heterono my makes the role itself dominate the hysterical person, configuring the dissociative states in which there seems to be another I controlling her actions. Here again we find a paradox in the hysterical form of being: dissociative semiology is the clinical form of an autonomous heteronomy, a control of the I by another hidden I, which acts according to its own laws, as a character.

ii. This other I can, therefore, become a character that dominates the author herself, in a parody of Pirandello’s play. The hysterical person, being dominated by a partial identity that does not linearly follow the demands of social roles, deforms it, (p. 658) transforming her existence into social caricatures, as postulated by Carbon no et al.. Thus, hysterical behavior is established like that of a buffoon, a Don Juan, etc., types that were previously literary and idealized rather than actually existing in social everyday life. The hysterical person, also from the point of view of identities, lives in a world of imagination and distortion.

Hysterical Anthropological Fragmentation The notes made so far are capable of guiding the psychopathological understanding of the continuous manifestations of the personality of the hysterical person, such as exam Aeration in expressions, seduction, and drama. However, for the understanding of semi The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria logic dissociative elements (i.e. acute or sub-acute traits marked by the disappearance of psychic elements such as memory and identity), or somatic elements such as paresis, anesthesia, or sensory loss (as in hysterical blindness or deafness), it becomes necessary to elucidate the second transcendental existential foundation of hysteria: fragmentation.

The “negative” clinical findings are also based on the excessive presence of the other as the source of a dictatorial meaning to which the I feels imprisoned and on which it de pends. The inability to exit the situation of relational hypo-sufficiency, in certain critical situations in which there is an increase in relational tensions, rises to the point of trigger ing another phenomena of hysteria: anthropological fragmentation. Hysteria, in its dipso ciative and conversive patterns, is characterized by the anthropological modifications in dimensions that are vital for the existence as follows.

Temporality When hysterical fragmentation is in place, temporality is marked by the partial disconti unity of the present in its relations with the past. This fragmentation of the present as Fumes two forms that are usually connected. The first has as a characteristic the suppers ion of the experiential continuity of some recent fact, of great significance, coming di Erectly from the interpersonal relations. The most typical case of this form of hysterical fragmentation is post-traumatic dissociation, in which, although existence continues to move in the world, in general, according to its previous pattern, the exact mnemonic seg Bent connected to the other disappears from the hysterical consciousness. This temporal gap, however, paradoxically represents the excessive presence of an aggressive punctual action of the other in the hysterical consciousness, which is not capable of integrating it into the total flow of its existence, producing a discontinuity that affects only a portion of the anthropological integrity of the hysterical person. The same existential foundation ex plains the classic hysterical belle indieéFence. In hysterical temporality, the other is pre served as absence; in schizophrenia, on the other hand, the other submerges in the figure of an anonymous world—the Dreadful —or of a threat that does not come from the conversations between the I and the other.

This partiality, which depletes relevant segments of the present, can lead to the second form of the temporal fragmentation of hysterical existence, the (p. 659) exaltation of manneristic behaviors. Hysterical mannerism is the manifestation on the surface of consciousness of the replacement of the genuine tem orality of biography by a behavioral typicality, created only to fill the gap left by frag mentation. Mannerism types created by hysteria are not anchored in an integral temporal ty, in which the future is the consequence of the present. Thus, the types of hysterical mannerism do not favor the construction of a web of relationships: they do not go beyond the exaltation of a colorful and temporally inconsequential present. This fragmented present, because it is not based on the roots of the biography itself, also has volatility as a consequence. In certain cases, some of these mannerism hysterical experiences may take on the appearance of absolute dyscontrol, which at first makes them almost indistinguish able from a psychotic picture, although, as we have seen, they occur in different existed The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria ital dimensions. The temporality of hysteria, therefore, even in its fragmentation, contain ues to be driven by the other.

Mercurial Spatiality The fragmentary spatiality of hysteria turns the experiential field into a mercurial soil, ready to dissolve at any moment. The fragmentation of lived spatiality assists in the dif ferential recognition of hysteria in relation to mania and melancholia. The state of mania cal exaltation fully and coherently compromises all the partial functions of consciousness; in relation to mania, hysterical excitation tends to be more discontinuous, with abrupt and sometimes contradictory emotional variations among them, showing dependence on the relation with the observer. Melancholy, although semiologically op posed to mania, from the point of view of the unity of its spatiality, seems to be similar. The melancholic experiences reach the whole of existence, whereas in hysteria any de pressie findings are not total, they shake only part of the functions of con sciousness, as in the aforementioned belle indieéFence.

Mercurial Spatiality The fragmentary spatiality of hysteria turns the experiential field into a mercurial soil, ready to dissolve at any moment. The fragmentation of lived spatiality assists in the dif ferential recognition of hysteria in relation to mania and melancholia. The state of mania cal exaltation fully and coherently compromises all the partial functions of consciousness; in relation to mania, hysterical excitation tends to be more discontinuous, with abrupt and sometimes contradictory emotional variations among them, showing dependence on the relation with the observer. Melancholy, although semiologically op posed to mania, from the point of view of the unity of its spatiality, seems to be similar. The melancholic experiences reach the whole of existence, whereas in hysteria any de pressie findings are not total, they shake only part of the functions of con sciousness, as in the aforementioned belle indieéFence.

Puzzle Corporeity The fragmentation of the hysterical world acts directly in corporeity, that is, in the expert Once of the lived body. The inability to maintain biographical temporality causes the body to lose its characteristics as an instrument for the realization of a lifeproject, becoming the passive stage of failure in the anthropological integrity of the exp riences. Hysterical conversion presents to the other an I dethroned of its own body and eager for reintegration of possession. This reintegration can only occur by the direct ac son of the other, observed classically in the influence of hypnosis on the hysterical cases. The difference in being a body and having a Coma is clear in hysterical experiences. The Coma, physical body ( Köper ) that silently supports existence, is ordered by the rules of physiology. The lived body ( Lab ) is ordered by the idiosyncratic representations of each person: it is an instrument of its field of signification in the world. In the hysterical person, there is a fragmentation of the lived body, a situation in which it becomes the repository of the impossibilities of signification of the hysterical consciousness. The meaning of a situation of which the I participates and to which it must react, if intolerable for the hysterical person, is drained into the lived body. However, as seen in conversions, it cannot be (p. 660) found in the lived body either. There it arises only as a denial of the power of the I, as motor fragility or sensory anesthesia. This meaning dissolved in the fragmentation of the unity of the lived body calls for a re unification. This reunification is given by the language of the totipotent and heroic other. There is, as a central characteristic of hysteria, the possibility of the behavior of the hys terical person being interpreted by the observer. The other is the giver of language, the agent capable of translating the disembodied expressiveness of the hysterical person into a reunified meaning. The hermeneutic function of the observer of the hysteria is equiv lent to that of someone who assembles a puzzle. In this puzzle, each piece, isolated, does not seem to have an autonomy of meaning. Once connected, as if by magic, the pieces gain integral meaning. In the same way, the hysterical person experiences in himself/her The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria self a meaning that cannot be expressed as a result of an existential weakness that needs the other to find its narrative.

An Anthropology of Hysteria: Dialectic and Existence The maintenance of the concept of hysteria is, in a sense, a symbol of the preservation of interpersonality as a primordial instrument for the construction of phenomenological di agnoses. Hysteria can only be defined from an interpersonal perspective, in which the ob server tries to connect the patient’s scattered experiences into a unity of meaning. This general unity, regardless of its diversity of presentation, may be termed haste ria, if by that concept we mean a mode of being-in-the-world that can be experienced by all people at some point in their lives. Moments in which the foundations of adulthood de pend heavily on the giving of meaning provided by a meaningful other. Therefore, haste ria is a general anthropological essence, participant, more actively or passively, of any and all human experience, and should not be understood as a pathology in the strict sense of the word. Hysteria, as a tyranny of the heteronomous meaning, can only be den tidied by an act of knowledge founded on an epistemology of interpersonality that allows it to be understood as an anthropological direction of meaning, sus ceptible to a high degree of conceptual indetermination. This indexer minacy does not mean that hysteria cannot be differentiated from conditions that are also expressed in the interpersonal world, and especially from borderline existence. We be Sieve that despite possible similarities in the emotional presentation, drama and relevance of the pole of the other, in the life-world of borderline persons we have a distinct anthro pological essence, characterized by meaninglessness of life and “and empty intentional ty” (Stanghellini and Rosfort 2013: 173), whereas in hysteria the intentionality has the other as its main goal. Can we, departing from this, postulate a constructive existential value for hysteria? Could one suppose that an involuntary and radical subordination to the other might lead to some existential advantage? The possible positive value of hysteria cal experiences seems to lie in the stabilization of the existence of the hysterical person in the power of the other, in the construction of a hierarchical relationship that can, at certain moments in life, or even definitively, make viable a life that, without such support, would not find paths for its own authenticity. Hysterical experience—notably in the per Tonalities marked by the anthropological essence of hysteria—shows that existential au thenticity should not be understood exclusively as a position of autonomy of the I in Bela son to the other. The examination of hysteria shows that to exist in an authentic manner is also possible through a hierarchical existence in which the other is irreplaceable (p. 661) and anthropologically necessary. As we shall see below, this statement is not an apology for tyranny or subordination. It is the opposite.

The anthropological value of hysteria can also be understood from another perspective. Hysteria, by establishing a special dual relationship, in which the other primarily, and the I secondarily, break the norms of conduct consolidated in the social roles of culture, may possess a value of creative insubordination. Hysteria would be the battering ram of a pos Bible renewal of society’s patterns of experience and behavior. Hysteria is, from this perspective, anti-melancholia, with its behaviors of The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria adherence to tradition. The hysterical person, with his supposed sentimentality and inau thenticity, not only leads to breaking the boundaries of the habitual, but somehow in Educes the other to do so, seducing him to undertake experiences on the limit of herself. Jointly, the hysterical relational duality may be a form of Dionysian refusal of the tradition enshrined in laziness and in the indulgence of habits naturalized by unreflective repeti son. Hysteria is an unexamined uprising that, at a second stage, claims for a reflection on the very ordering of life and social relations. Here again, hysteria diverges anthropology ally from mania: mania has the appearance of rupture, with its jocular irreverence; how ever, it is no more than a conservative exaltation of the I, by means of inflation of the self. Hysteria is, in a sense, a creative distortion of the anthropological proportions of the in terpersonality, which makes and invites the other to make life a constant paroxysm, hop ing that the repetition of an existential fiction can lead life to the experience of brilliance and passion, regardless of risking annulment in the abysses of the vital falsification. Hys Beria makes us face, like no other anthropological condition, the dilemmas of human re newel.

Hysteria, anthropologically, reveals the Sartrean bad faith of which human identity is composed and which it needs to transcend its own facticity, but in which it risks besom ing incarcerated. The capacity for transcendence and renewal belongs to the human be ing, but in hysteria it is revealed more clearly by the force of mobilization of the other. This mobilization of the other and the I, although partially inauthentic, detaches the Hindi visuals from the community background in which they are rooted. From this detachment, two trajectories can be established: one of them passes through the rejection of the col Elective against the excessively singular individual; in the other, the novelty it contains can offer the collective new forms of existence. Forms that, initially inauthentic, by the use and repetition, gradually become authentic for all. It is this anthropologically hysterical function that inspires the artists who, breaking the conventions of their time, launch the history of society to new paths. In short, we could say that the anthropological essence of hysteria is the human dialogue between voluntary servitude and Nietzsche’s superman. A radical and profoundly human dialogue, which resists time and changes in classificatory farmings. PAGE_BREAK Fernandez A. fifth.. “Phenomenology, Typification, and Ideal Types in Psychiatric Di agnosis and Classification.” In R. Bluhm (ed.), Knowing and Acting in Medicine, pp. 39– 58. Latham, MD: Bowman & Littlefield International.

Fuchs T.. “The Temporal Structure of Intentionality and Its Disturbance in Schizo phrenia.” Psychopathology 40: 229–235. doi: 10.1159/000101365 Fuchs T.. “Temporality and Psychopathology.” Phenomenology and The Cognitive Sciences 12: 75–104. doi: 10.1007/s11097-010-9189-4 Fuchs T. and Schlimme J. E.. “Embodiment and Psychopathology: A Phenomenology cal Perspective.” Current Opinion in Psychiatry 22: 570–575. doi:10.1097/YCO. 0b013e3283318e5c (p. 663) Giorgi A.. The Descriptive Phenomenological Method in Psychology. A Mod ivied Husserlian Approach. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

Jasper K.. General Psychopathology. (M. W. Hamilton & J. Hoeing) Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Jonckheere P.. Psychiatric Phénoménologique: Tome 2. Argenteuil: Le Circle Her méneutique.

Kimura B.. Scritti di psicopatologia fenomenologica. Coma: Giovanni Fioriti Edi tore.

Klaus A.. “Phänomenologie pseudohysterischer Verhaltens-und Erlebnisweisen Melancholischer.” Fortschritte der Neurologie-Psychatrie. 53: 469–475.

Klaus A.. “Pseudohysterie Melancholischer.” In G. Seidler (ed.), Hysteria heute. Metamorphose Dines Paradiesvogels, pp. 131–143. Stuttgart: Ferdinand Eke Verlag.

Klaus A.. “Modes d ́existence des hystériques et des mélancoliques.” In P. Fédida and J. Schotte (eating disorders.), Psychiatric et existence, pp. 231–246. Grenoble: ÉEditions JérÔme Dillon.

Lewis A.. “The Survival of Hysteria.” Psychological Medicine 5: 9–12. doi: 10.1017/ S0033291700007169 Bayou R., Kirmayer L. J., Simon G., Kroenke K., and Sharpe M.. “Somatoform Dis orders: Time for a New Approach in DSM-fifth.” American Journal of Psychiatry 162: 847– 855.

Merleau-Monty M.. Phenomenology of Perception, trans. D. Lades. London, New York: Rutledge.

The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria Mesas G.. “A Phenomenological Contribution to the Approach of Biological Psy chiatry.” Journal of Phenomenological Psychology 41: 180–200. doi: 10.1163/156916210X532117 Mesas G.. “O sentido da fenomenologia na Psicopatologia Feral de Karl Jasper.” Psicopatologia FenomenolóMica Contemporânea 3: 23–47.

Mesas G., Tamelini M., and Cutting J.. “A Meta-analysis of the Core Essence of Psychopathological Entities: An Historical Exercise in Phenomenological Psychiatry.” His Cory of Psychiatry, doi: 10.1177/0957154X17715414 Micale, M. S. “On the ‘Disappearance’ of Hysteria: A Study in the Clinical Econ struction of a Diagnosis.” Journal of the History of Science Society 84: 496–526.

Minkowski, E.. Le temps vécu. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Moldovan R., Rad M., Băban A., and Dumitraşcu D. L.. “Evolution of Psychos masc Diagnosis in DSM. Historical Perspectives and New Development for Internists.” Romanian Journal of internal Medicine 53: 25–30.

Pirandello L.. Sei personaggi in circa d ́autore. Firenze: R. Bemproda & Figlio— Editor.

Regier D. A.. “Somatic Presentations of Mental Disorders: Refining the Research Agenda for DSM-fifth. Editorial.” Psychosomatic Medicine 69: 827–828.

Rovaletti M.-L. (1999a). “La Listeria o la tentative extreme del ser Como exhibición.” Re vista Chilean de Neuropsiquiatría 37: 83–90.

Rovaletti M.-L. (1999b). “La Listeria; una condición human hecha de Aura ceremonial.” Revista Chilean de Neuropsiquiatría 37: 91–99.

Sartre J.-P.. L ́être et le néant. Paris: Gallimard.

Sass L. and Pinkos E.. “Faces of Intersubjectivity: A Phenomenological Study of Interpersonal Experience in Melancholia, Mania, and Schizophrenia.” Journal of Phenom ecological Psychology 46: 1–32.

Schneider K.. Klinische Psychopathologie. 15 Auflage. Stuttgart, New York: Reorg Theme Verlag.

(p. 664) Sigmund D.. “Phänomenologie der hysterischen Pseudopsychosen. Fortschritte der Neurologie-Psychatrie 65: 387–395.

Stanghellini G.. “The Meanings of Psychopathology.” Current Opinion in Psychiatry 22: 559–564. doi: 10.1097/YCO.0b013e3283318e Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R.. “Borderline Depression. A Desperate Vitality.” Our nal of Consciousness Studies 20: 153–177.

The Life-World of Persons with Hysteria Starcevic fifth.. “Somatoform Disorders and DSM-fifth: Conceptual and Political Issues in the Debate.” Psychosomatic 47: 277–281.

Stone J., Hewitt R., Carson A., Barlow C., and Sharpe M.. “The ‘Disappearance’ of Hysteria: Historical Mystery or Illusion?” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 101: 12–18. doi: 10.1258/jrsm.2007.070129 Utter J.. L ́anticipation. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Trillat É.. Histoire de l’hysteria. Paris: Seghers.

Butt J.. “Über den tragenden Lab.” In J. Butt (ed.), Auf dem Wage zu Diner antropologischen Psychiatric. Gesammelte Au'sätze, pp. 416–426. Berlin, Göttingen, Hei delberg: Stringer Verlag.

Notes:

1 ( ) The phenomenological strategy of searching for the essence of psychological expert Fences is not undebatable, since other researchers consider ideal types or prototypes as the main object of phenomenology. Moreover, the search for a fixed ob Sect as the aim of the phenomenological procedure is also disputable.

2 ( ) The Jaspersian definition extends the “appear before” to the I of the hysterical person itself. Later, in this text, we will defend how this modality of appearance may be reduced to “appear before the other.”

3 ( ) We consider, throughout this chapter, that the style of the anthropological dispropor son in hysteria determines strong interpersonal polarities. Consequently, hysteria may be better understood in terms of the polarity I–Other (however, with a view to reading flow, we will only use the notions of “I” and “other”) than in terms of self-modifications. In hys Beria, the role of the self is limited to enhancing the above mentioned polarity.

Guilherme Mesas Postgraduate Program on Phenomenological Psychopathology - Santa Cara de São Pablo School of Medical Sciences Rafael Zorzanelli Social Institute for Social Medicine, State University of Rio de Janeiro Melissa Tamelini Institute of Psychiatry, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculty of Medicine of the University of São Pablo (USP)

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder Giovanni Stanghellini and Milena Mancini The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Persons with borderline personality disorder are often described as affected by extreme emotional fluctuations. This article analyses their fundamental emotions: dysphoria and anger, despair, boredom, shame, and guilt. Our focus will be mainly on the two distinct life-world configurations that originate from dysphoria and anger: the dysphoric lifeworld and the life-world of anger. The first is characterized by a quasi-ineffable constella son of feelings in which Self and Others are irritatingly indefinite. In the second, the vague sense of Self and Others disappear: the Self is the victim, the Other the Offender. This emotional intensity does not allow borderline persons to distance themselves from what they feel here-and-now, thus feelings and values overlap. We call this “frustrated normativity.” Borderline persons are guided by the value of authenticity thus entering in to collision with the social norms/conventions which they consider inauthentic and there fore an unwarranted challenge to their truly natural being: spontaneity.

Keywords: anger, authenticity, borderline, dysphoria, emotions, frustrated normativity, life-world, limit situation, values # Introduction BORDERLINE personality disorder (borderline personality disorder) is a highly variegated clinical constellation of abnormal phenomena characterized by unstable mood, behavior, and relationships. De spite different approaches emphasizing different aspects of borderline personality disorder, there is general agree Bent about the fact that its principal features are the following: 1) emotions tend to be in tense and rapidly shifting; 2) relationships tend to be conflicted and stormy; 3) there may be impulsive, self-destructive, or self-defeating behaviors; 4) there is a lack of a clear and coherent sense of identity.

In this chapter, we describe borderline personality disorder from the angle of the emotions displayed by these per sons. We assume that their existence oscillates between dysphoria and anger: dysphoric The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder mood is a permanent trait, and angry affect is an intermittent state. Since dysphoria and anger generate two different life-worlds to borderline persons, our descriptions will in Elude two distinct configurations: the dysphoric life-world and the life-world of anger. The world of dysphoria is characterized by a painful experience of incoherence and inner emptiness, a feeling of uncertainty and inauthenticity in interpersonal relationships, and an excruciating sense of futility and inanity of life. But it also entails a sense of vitality, al though a disorganized, aimless, and explosive one. In the world of anger the vague and confused sense of self and others is suddenly replaced by a clear, although elementary normative, universe in which it is painfully obvious to the borderline person who is “good” and who is “bad.” This sudden feeling of infallible righteousness helps the border line person find his lost identity in a world that momentarily regains its structure and meaning.

In the following section we provide a comprehensive analysis of the value-structure of persons with borderline personality disorder. They live under the spell of a frustrated normativity, driven by the value of authenticity thus entering into collision with the (p. 666) ethical norms or social conventions that structure and organize our interpersonal world and the hypocrisy and inauthenticity of the pallid emotions by which other persons live.

Emotions in Borderline Persons There are two basic emotions characterizing the life-world of borderline persons: anger and dysphoria. Before we proceed with the description of these, it is appropriate to briefly introduce a distinction between affects and moods (Stanghellini and Rosfort 2013a; see also Rosfort’s chapter on Emotions, this volume). Affects are focused and possess a specific directedness. They are felt as motivated, more determinate and articulated than moods. Affects normally do not open up a horizontal awareness, but occupy all my Batten tonal space. This is the case with anger. Moods, on the contrary, are unfocused. They do not possess a specific directedness and aboutness. They are felt as unmotivated. Moods do not direct us to anything specific in our relation to the environment, and we are not able to put our finger on what exactly causes our particular mood.

Anger is an affect triggered by a personal offense and as such it often motivates a desire for retaliation. Anger may entail assaultive behavior which summons these affects as a sinister shadow. Despite its complex cognitive, personal, and social aspects, anger is, in most cases, a readily identified emotion because of its rather clear be havioral manifestations such as increase of muscle tension, scowling, grinding of teeth, glaring, clenching of fists, changes of arm position and body posture.

The characterization of dysphoric mood requires more attention because of its more sub Cued manifestation and less direct connection to behavioral patterns. Dysphoria Bani fests itself as a prolonged, unmotivated, indistinct, and quasi-ineffable constellation of feelings that convey a nebula of vague impulses, sensations, and perceptions that perm ate a person’s whole field of awareness. The psychological and psychopathological char The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder acterization of dysphoria is quite difficult because of its subdued manifestation and loose connection to definite behavioral patterns. It is an oppressive, and sometimes unbar able, mood. In its etymological roots the word “dysphoria” ( dysphoros = hard to bear) is quite polysemous, nearly overlapping “bad mood” in very general terms, vaguely defining an emotional condition in which a person is heavily oppressed, and in which that person may either react and show his feelings, or passively suffer and submit to them. Phenomenal characterizations of dys phobia mainly focus on its being felt as a burden one cannot get rid of because it is not ex Vernal to one’s own self. It is an obstacle to movement and, at the same time, it may gen rate impatience, restlessness, and an incoercible impulse to move away without a deli Bite goal. It is also experienced as an uncomfortable feeling characterized by being painful and sorrowful, as well as discontented and indignant (see Ross Mons and D’Agostino’s chapter Dysphoria in Borderline Person, this volume). This complexity elicits opposite kinds of movement such as inaction/action, resignation/resistance, suffering/re taliation. Also, in dysphoria, the normal distinct son between self and other is blurred. No particular action is dictated by dysphoric mood. On the contrary, it complicates the relation between feeling and action because it introduces doubts and questions. Dysphoria is a mood that consists of a purely Poetic act without a noematic target. In borderline personality disorder existence, noematic (p. 667) representations do not function as a dispositive “to control the Poetic act so that it does not deviate from its Bela tionship with life” ( Kimura 2000: 88; our translation). This characterization tallies per fectly with the experience that borderline persons have of their own dysphoric mood: an untamed source of vitality, a disturbing and an exuberant force, creative and destructive at the same time, a vigor that brings life as well as annihilation.

In the borderline person’s existence there is a dialectic between dysphoria and anger: - Dysphoria is the background mood trait characterizing persons with borderline per Tonality disorder. It is the long-lasting and profound emotional tonality or basic temperament in which the borderline person is enmeshed, and as such it influences both the voluntary and involuntary aspect of her perceptions and actions. This emotional state is saturated with a brimming constellation of feelings without any explicit object or target.

Anger is an acute intermittent state. Angry outbursts, emanating from the dysphoric background, are typically accompanied by feelings of shame and humiliation and may generate acute micro-psychotic episodes during which the borderline person may de velop paranoid symptoms, including transitory persecutor delusions in which the per sector is typically a significant other (the patient’s partner, relative, or therapist, for example).

Dysphoria can also be an acute intermittent state during which their dysphoric mood intensifies, culminating in a painful paralysis of action characterized by feelings of spleen, boredom, despair, emptiness. This may entail tormenting ideas of meaningless Bess, persecutor guilt, and, in the most severe cases, suicidal ideation.

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder There are other emotions that may have a special importance in the experience of border line persons, namely, boredom and shame.

Boredom

Boredom is a mood characterized by a pervasive lack of interest in everything. The entire world is monotonous, and this monotonousness cannot be analyzed by the person into fur her elements, but encloses the surroundings, things as well as persons, in a vague and unarticulated way: the world as a whole “seeps towards me from the globe like a cosmic fog, deadening my mind, slackening my will, and depleting me of energy” ( Smith 1986: 191). While bored, the world-whole is just happening and is a blankness that endures. Lived space is an indifferent extension, devoid of salience, offering no directions, Lori Fund. It conveys a feeling of meaninglessness and finis vitae. Lived time is an oppressing stillness. One’s movements remain stuck in indecisiveness. The other is distant, meaning less, annoying.

Heidegger recognizes three forms of boredom: being bored with something (or to be sick of something) ( Gelangweiltwerden von twas ), being bored by something (Sichlangweilen bei twas ), and profound boredom ( tiefe Langweile ). Each form of boredom is distinguished from the others in terms of its relation to how time passes.

The first form of boredom is our pre-theoretical understanding of boredom. It occurs when we are bored with some person, object, or state of affairs that causes annoyance. It (p. 668) arises, quoting Heidegger’s example, while waiting at the station for our train which is already delayed, and communications are not encouraging because we don’t know when the train is going to arrive. The second form of boredom is both more pro found and slightly more complicated. In it, there is no determinate person or object that is boring. Rather, we are bored by something indeterminate and unfamiliar: something that has the character of “I know not what” ( Heidegger 1995: 114), and that Heidegger ultimately identifies with the passing of time itself—not in the form of time dragging, as in the first form of boredom, but rather in the sense of time standing still. Heidegger’s ex ample of this form of boredom is attending a dinner party, on our own volition, in an at tempt to kill time. At the party, the food, company, and music are all pleasant. And yet, when we reflect upon the evening and situate it in terms of what was interrupted in order to attend the party and of what is coming in the next days, it dawns on us that we were bored all this time after all. Our own decision to partake in such a predictable, and in ret Prospect dull, event results in an emptiness: the party does not fulfill us.

Profound boredom is the third and deepest form of boredom. It is an extreme and over whelming experience in which everything bores us and, unlike the first form of boredom, there is no point in fighting it. In profound boredom we stand without any concerns and interests. Profound boredom strips away all identifying characteristics, history, or projects; beings as a whole withdraw, they lose all significance. In profound boredom, ab solute indifference overtakes us and we become insignificant, as does our surrounding The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder environment. This form of boredom thus renders us “an undifferentiated no one” by dis closing to us a world with no meaning or significance (Heidegger 1995: 135).

In the borderline existence, the boredom implicated is of the third kind. Here, boredom shares with dysphoria the same temporal structure (monotonousness) and an analogous feeling of bluntness. Indeed, in boredom as well as in dysphoria the world, other people, and oneself just happen and are void of significance. The disappearance of meaning and significance that people with borderline personality disorder experience in boredom is correlated with temporality. Total indifference means that nothing carries future prospects for us and that nothing relates and gives meaning to our past. Indeed, in bor decline boredom, all three temporal dimensions of Casein (past, present, and future) blend together and it is this “unarticulated unity” that entrances Casein (Heidegger 1995: 148). What bores us is not any specific entity or state of affairs; rather, it is time (as orig nary temporality) itself. Time bores us by entrancing and binding us. So, in this way, the mind goes blank. Nothing has a sense. The borderline person goes around in circles, and in a purposeless way.

Shame

Whereas boredom is a mood that stymies my mind and dulls my attention, shame is an af Sect that awakens and focuses my attention. When I feel ashamed, I am aware of being seen by another person whose gaze uncovers a part of who I am, usually a part that makes me feel embarrassed, dishonored, and humiliated. Lived space in shame has a centripetal character as one experiences a feeling of centrality. I feel my body naked, deprived of any protection, soiled. The other is in a dome ant position, a watcher or a witness. Lived time comes to a fixation in an instant that grows to infinity. My identity is constantly threatened by the instability brought about by humiliation.

(p. 669) The effect of shame is that it reduces the complexity of the person that I am to one single aspect of it: when I feel ashamed, I think that for the other I am nothing but that specific feature of the complexities of who I am. In shame, I feel that my whole self disappears, while that detail—the stain —of my self that made me feel ashamed becomes over-conspicuous and takes center-stage. Shame reveals to me my selfhood as an object for another; or shame is, as Sartre writes, “shame of self; it is the recognition of the fact that I am indeed that object which the Other is looking at and judging” ( Sartre 1956: 261). The others are piercing gazes that nail me to what awakened my feeling of shame: an act or an omission, or some failing or defect, which elicited contempt, derision or avoidance from other people. Shame means to be utterly exposed to the present, to the painful presence of evaluating gazes, to annihilating disdain and contempt.

The feeling of shame—Schemer argues (2012; see also Cutting 2009a, 2009b )—belongs to the clear-obscure of human nature. For our unique place within the structure of the world and its entities is between spirituality and animality. Shame is the revelation of the nature of the human being: the basic condition for the feeling of shame to occur is only given The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder when the light of consciousness is existentially bound up with the living organism and shines down on the inner life. To the origin of the feeling of shame there belongs some thing like an imbalance and disharmony between the sense and the claim of spiritual per sonhood and embodied animal needs. It is only because the human essence is tied up with a “lived body” that we can get in the position where we can feel shame.

The Life-world of Dysphoria Dysphoria and anger engender very different kinds of existential orientation, thereby en acting very different configurations of the life-world that borderline persons live in.

Time

There are two main time features in the life-world of dysphoria. The first is monotony. Time can be experienced as a tedious, wearing, dull cloud in which past, present, and fu Cure are not clearly separable. The second is instantaneity. Time is experienced as an ab solute “now” into which the person, her identity, and history collapse.

We have seen this first feature of borderline temporality while describing profound bore dom. In profound boredom one feels stripped away from all identifying characteristics, history, or projects. It renders one “an undifferentiated no one” and discloses a world with no meaning or significance. In boredom, nothing matters to us, nothing attracts us, there is nothing to which we can relate. The world, other people, and oneself just happen and are void of significance.

To the dysphoric person, the “now” is a pure present, lacking extension into the future (protection ) and into the past ( retention ). Presenting themselves independently from past and future, they cannot feel the “length” of these Bows, as it is possible with a present that develops out of the past and is directed toward the future. Each now moment thus becomes an infinity. This kind of absolute “now” has no temporal delimitation, no history cal determination, and no linguistic-symbolic articulation. This isolated “now” is not able to carry any kind of relation to, or become an integrated part of, the narrative (p. 670) identity of the dysphoric person. In these moments, an acute feeling of despair, that is, discordant directions of intentionality leading to a paralysis of thinking and action, ac companies dysphoria. This “transitory present” has no depth. “It lacks the fulfillment which only originates from the integration of past experience and anticipated future” ( Fuchs 2007: 381).

Yet in the life-world of dysphoria the absorption in the present moment quite paradoxical ly does not just convey feelings of void and monotony, but also thrilling experiences of in stantaneity. Time in the life-world of dysphoria is punctuated by “islands of feast” in a stagnant “ocean of spleen” ( Kane 2001: 214). It is being “dead for a long time” interrupt ed by transient, vanishing, volatile moments of intensity. Dysphoria is punctuated with moments of excitement during which one’s blind vitality finds its fulfillment. This side of time-experience is called by Bin Kimura infra festum. As in the atmosphere of a The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder feast, here we find the irruption of spontaneity and ecstasy, oblivious of the past and the future. Blind spontaneity is the opposite of voluntary autonomy as the rapture of ecstasy is the opposite of engaged care. Moreover, dysphoric persons are unable to cope with the flux of immediateness; this flux becomes paroxysmal, immediateness chaotic. The border line person is immersed in the infra festum and experiences a short circuit of selfhood in front of the paroxysm of chaotic immediateness. The absolute “now” is the night of the self and the disintegration of personhood. In dysphoric temporality there is no separation, no space in between the “now” and the person: the person collapses into her “now”.

Thus, the present moment is momentary in the sense that it is lived as evanescent and fleeting. But next to this volatile and empty character of temporality, sometimes the events are not just momentary, but also momentous, that is, overwhelmingly significant. The present moment can be spasmodic, urgent, claimant. Events—including the appearing of a person in the room, someone’s way of moving, the tone of his voice—may acquire an offensive, thing-like physiognomy, and become intruding. Borderline persons can be over ly sensitive to minimal social stimuli, like the other’s facial expressions that pass nob served by the majority of people. Typically, the patient is not capable of integrating these “spasms” of hyper-awareness in a fluent and attuned relationship with the other person. Instead of contributing to the development of an exchange of feelings and views between oneself and the other, they stand out as islands of immediateness, leaving no space be tween oneself and the other, and between oneself and one’s own overwhelming insights.

Dysphoric persons, therefore, live in a restricted temporal horizon and are scarcely aware of a future or a past. They appear inconstant, voluble, “moody,” often prey to emotional crises. They also appear to be trapped in present stimuli, so that, for instance, their theta pectic conversation is often a mere catalogue of recent events. Their awareness is caps Bated by the present moment, as if they were unable to switch off the stimuli that are coming from the environment or from their own body. These sensations may appear irrel Levant or meaningless to an external observer, but for borderline patients themselves they are abnormally important and amplified. This phenomenon cannot be explained as abhor mal arousal, as it is the case with anxious patients. A further feature of temporal disconti unity is the so-called “traumatic system” that will be analyzed in the sec son on narrative and limit-situation section.

(p. 671) Space Dysphoria has a horizontal absorption in the sense that it attends to the world as a whole, not focusing on any particular object or situation. No particular action is dictated by dys phobic mood. On the contrary, it complicates the relation between feeling and action be cause it introduces doubt, hesitation, and questions. It entails a kind of paralysis of action and thinking, but not a static one, rather a frenzied, disconcerting paralysis.

Dysphoric space is usually experienced as indifferent extension, a space devoid of salience that offers no directions and no way out. We find an apparently similar phenom The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder non describing lived space in persons with schizophrenia. The basic difference between these two is that whereas in the schizophrenic mood lived space conveys a feeling of un reality, in borderline persons it conveys a feeling of meaninglessness. Furthermore, when dysphoria turns into boredom, the surrounding world is “moribund”.

Body

The emotional fragility or stable instability experienced by borderline persons while in habiting the dysphoric life-world is caused by a raw, unmediated bodily vitality that does not accommodate to pre-reflective intentional structures or cognitive efforts. Their dys phobic mood is characterized by extreme presence of a primary, bodily force that frag Bents the intentional structure of the lived body, exposing a brutal vitality, a mere body entirely at the mercy of the basic biological values that nourish and to some extent orient human emotional life. There is little possibility for action in this kaleidoscopic universe of raw feelings. Objects become unfocused and intentional structures crumple under the in tensity of this emotional pressure. The intimate sense of being an embodied self is eclipsed by the sense of having an intimidating body. This chaotic vitality, being devoid of intentional structure and content, desperately seeks an object, mostly a person, at which to direct its surplus of energy. This means that the dysphoric person feels the presence of a spontaneous energy without any clear direction or target. It is emotional energy that throws itself at the other with an overwhelming intensity. Often, this impulse takes on a sexual form. This power is a violent spasm that takes control of the body and takes the representation of oneself to pieces, reducing it to an assemblage of disordered emotions and drives. However, it is also a power that expresses an encouraging vitality seducingly in touch with invigorating sensations.

The sense of void is very common in borderline depression or in the micro-depressive episodes which may punctuate the borderline person’s daily existence. These are the episodes during which deep feelings of depersonalization add up to the permanent lack of a stable, integral identity. Sensations of emptiness, numbness, fragmentation, vanishing of one’s own self are typically accompanied by feelings of abandonment and aloneness. Precisely because dysphoria as a mood cannot be easily modulated, the only possible con tool is sought outside of the mind. This relief can be achieved by acting on the environs Bent and transforming it with violence. Yet, self-harm is the most typical way to find re lief from the torment of the inner tension of dysphoria ( Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014 ). Self-mutilations might represent a means of reducing the tension. Cutting represents an other attempt to modulate or staunch a negative and oppressive mood condition, precipi Bating it in a place that has a name (p. 672) and is objectifiable, delimited, and so also “curable” (Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014 ). It is as if the body could be a concrete and visible sort of drain for overwhelming emotions.

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder Self Dysphoric mood brings about a formless sense of one’s own self. The development of a co hesive and continuous sense of self depends upon a special form of dialogue that is lacking in the borderline person’s life-history. A non-linear, associative, and apparently purposeless form of dialogue, whose topic may at first glance seem banal. It is like a game, since it is apparently aimless. Or like an atmosphere, because it can be ex tremely difficult to answer questions about what is actually going on here or what we are really talking about. Intimacy is the basic emotion involved in this kind of conversation. Intimacy, Mares explains, is not to be equated with confession or unrestrained revelation. Rather, it is a feeling of “aloneness-togetherness” in which this special kind of conversation is embedded, such as having a peculiar warmth or a form associated with a sense of well-being. Intimacy fundamentally depends upon the sharing of one’s own inner experience with another.

Moreover, the integrity of the self can be damaged by traumatic experience. The kind of trauma at issue here is not only sexual abuse or some form of violent behavior, but rather takes the form of an invalidating environment. An invalidating environment is one in which communication of private experiences is not met by appropriate responses. Instead of being validated, private experiences are trivialized, their expression is discouraged, and emotions (especially painful emotions) are disregarded. The kind of trauma that may jeopardize the development of a warm and intimate sense of self is the absence of recon nation.

Other Persons At the heart of borderline persons’ drama resides the excruciating experience of the oth er. The main concern of the borderline person is to achieve a sense of recognition. The other is indispensable for living and its absence makes the presence of the self impossi ble. The other is experienced as absent when she is not totally present. Her absence, or incomplete presence, is often the reason for feelings of non-recognition and desperate loss of selfhood. The other who does not donate her entire self is an inauthentic other. The other is also the source of aching shame, since her gaze is permanently experienced on the razor’s edge between recognition and humiliation.

In synchrony with the drastic fluctuation of feelings, there is an instability in the appear Once of other persons. In the life-world of dysphoria, others may appear as mere shad ows. The other is experienced as indefinite, indeterminate, indistinct, ill-defined. All these qualities that the dysphoric person perceives in other persons express in semi-Censorial terms the unintelligibility of the other. The indefiniteness of the other worsens in acute dysphoric-depressive episodes during which the other may become opaque: fuzzy, blurred, caliginous, cloudy, foggy, Frey, hazy. When the dysphoric mood turns into anger, the other changes from being opaque to being tenebrous: he is ambivalent, evasive, ob cure, puzzling, un-explicit, and suspect.

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder (p. 673) Something of the desperate and frustrated energy of the dysphoric mood is trans erred to the intentional structures of the interpersonal relation. The borderline person longs for intense, passionate relationships. It is all-or-nothing. This immensely intense character of the interpersonal relationships makes them highly vulnerable. The slightest change in the emotional atmosphere, a wrong word, a delay, and the borderline person feels attacked or humiliated, and reacts with anger.

The Life-World of Anger Time As we have seen in describing the life-world of dysphoria, borderline persons live unis topically, bound to a transitory present without depth. The dysphoric person is absorbed in an unmediated instantaneity: a pure or absolute now devoid of past and future. This is also the case with anger, although with some relevant differences.

Anger makes a person identify completely with her momentary state of mind, unable to gain a distance from the present situation, torn by emerging impulses. In anger, border line persons are completely absorbed by the phenomenon that agitates them. When a per son is angry, a relevant feature of the world (usually threatening her personal existence and the value she attaches to it) captivates her, irrupts into her field of awareness with out her having decided to turn her attention to it. She becomes fixated on the object of her anger, and all her attention is captured by it.

Space

Significant transformations in the experience of space may occur in relation to the com plexity of emotions that characterize the borderline existence. In the life-world of anger, events are described as “wounding,” “biting,” “stinging.” Someone’s remark may be felt as “caustic,” “corrosive”; her behavior “raw,” “sharp.” Changes in lived space make it possible to experience someone’s comportment as piercing; the piercing metaphors arise from alterations of lived space.

In general, the physiognomy of things in the life-world of borderline persons reflects the fluctuation in lived time between evanescence and urgency: things show themselves on the edge between melting and blasting. Whereas in dysphoria space is an indifferent ex tension devoid of salience and offers no directions and movement remain stuck in the in decisiveness of juxtaposition, in the life-world of anger space offers no protection. Space is a bee-line between the angry person and the person who offended her. The offending one gains an absolute centrality around which everything else dissolves.

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder Body In the grip of the anger the body is impregnated by it. A numb and empty body becomes a body filled with anger, that is, a bodily self that can finally feel itself, a strong and hard (p. 674) embodied self that repays the suffered insults—but at the cost of losing its human ity, and thus wrecking the fragile dialectic of selfhood and otherness constitutive of per sonhood. It is a bodily self that is insensitive to the voice and the face of the other person, a self without innocence. The body merely becomes a “state” of wild emotional tension bringing the person to destruction.

Self

Anger tends to preserve and maintain a precarious cohesion of the self (Pazzagli and Ross Mons 2000: 223). In this perspective, anger is to a certain extent a self-defining emotion. This is the case for the borderline person’s anger, which seems to be situated at the point where an intention swings into its opposite: fragile doubts about oneself and the other into incorrigible convictions, moral indignation into the dishonor of aggression, the fire of love into the stake of intolerance. This is indeed the place of emotions like shame and humiliation that pave the way to the outburst of anger. The lifeworld of shame to a certain extent parallels that of anger. The experience of humiliation precedes the experience of anger. I feel seen by another person whose piercing gaze nails me to a part of myself that makes me feel humiliated. I feel my body deprived of any pro Section and at the same time dirtied. Yet shame, as compared to dysphoria, is a feeling that restores a sense of self-identity and self-recognition, although confined to a negative part of one’s self. The effect of shame is that it reduces the nebula of feelings conveyed by dysphoria to one single feature: my stain. Reducing my identity to my defect, it restores a primitive sense of selfhood.

Anger may come as a reaction to shame, and in this case, the person may lose her oppor unity to contact and recognize that part of herself that the other’s gaze has revealed. When shame turns into anger we forget that we must feel shame because of our being a continuous movement and a transition in which the gaze of the other serves to acknowl edge our limitations and to come to terms with our guiltless guilt.

Anger tends to preserve and maintain a precarious cohesion of the self, in the sense that venting one’s anger is a way of feeling alive and of affirming one’s right to exist as the unique person that one is. In anger episodes, the vague and confused sense of values and norms that characterizes dysphoric existence is suddenly replaced by a crystal clear, al though elementary normative, universe in which it is painfully obvious to the borderline person who is “good” (oneself) and who is “bad” (the other). This sudden feeling of infalli ble rightfulness helps the borderline person to find his or her lost identity in a world that momentarily regains its structure and meaning.

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder Other Persons First of all, anger is the means through which the borderline person reacts to every mini mal break in empathy: anger emerges when the person feels that the other will not fulfill her basic need for recognition. Anger makes the other clearly visible, strongly character zed, and standing out very distinctively. It allows a switch from the state of vagueness where the other is blurred and ambiguous to a condition in which the other is crisp and clear. In this sense, anger has a “centripetal” role, coagulating the emotional dispersion that characterizes dysphoria. Furthermore, anger defends from the pain of separation and loss: a mind kept busy (p. 675) by angry fantasies is still clinging to what it has lost (Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014). In the light of anger, which dissipates the hazy atoms here of dysphoria, the other suddenly comes into focus as a persecutor. The gaze of the other mercilessly lays bare the patient’s inner insufficiency and thus makes her feel hu militated. So, the sense of identity established by anger is highly unstable due to the fact that the cohesion brought about by anger is constantly threatened by the instability brought about by humiliation. Moreover, feelings of abandonment, or lack of attention, acceptance, help, protection, reciprocity, support—or in short, lack of recognition —are typical in the borderline traumatic existence. The dysphoric person looks primarily in the direction of the other. It is the other who is guilty, since he or she acted out of voluntary intention. These feelings may kindle acute emotional states characterized by, resentment and indignation. The self-other relationship may take the form of a transitory persecutor delusion.

Narrative Self and Limit Situation As we saw above, borderline persons lack “object constancy” in the sense of being able to retain a positive image of significant others in spite of temporary separation or rejection. The result is what Fuchs has called a fragmentation of the narrative self: a shifting view of oneself, with sharp discontinuities, rapidly changing representations of oneself and the others and an underlying feeling of inner emptiness. There is no sense of continua ity over time and across situations, no concept of self-development that could be project ed into the future, but only an endless repetition of the same emotional states, creating a peculiar a-temporal mode of existing. The patients often rapidly change their goals, jobs, and friends as well as their convictions; they are unable to commit themselves to a set of self-defining volition, enduring relationships, and long-term aspirations.

Temporal integration and narrative identity are closely intertwined. Narrative identity im plies a meaningful coherence of the personal past, present, and future. This meaningful coherence is the product of an enduring labor striving to make one’s life coherent and to fill it with meaningful behavior. Narrative identity is different from mere constancy or sameness, since it is a temporal relation to oneself by remaining faithful to one’s commit Bents, promises, and responsibilities in front of other people (Ricoeur 1992: 118). It also requires the capacity of self-determination by forming durable second-order volition, at The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder the price, if necessary, of repression or conflicts. Borderline persons lack the capacity to form enduring second-order volition, in the light of which present impulses could be evaluated and selected.

An essential feature of the borderline persons’ life-world is that typically these persons are not able to distance themselves from present events. The present moment irrupts without mediation into the existence of borderline persons. Borderline persons are not able to liberate themselves from what they are suffering right now: there is no separation between the now experience and the borderline person. The incapacity to distance one self from an event, to take a stance in front of it, to integrate it into a narrative sequence and by doing so to give a personal meaning to it, are defining characteristics of trauma. A trauma is an event that the person is not able to appropriate, that is, to integrate in her narrative identity. Our existence is moved forward by what happens in our life. Events happen to us as a part of involuntary (p. 676) otherness involved in a human life, and we appropriate these events, or we define ourselves in opposition to these events; but no matter how we relate ourselves to these events, our sheer relation, our position-taking, instills personal meaning in them, and by this activity we affirm our selfhood. The event becomes a traumatic event, it becomes pathogenic, when it does not kindle the dialectic of narrative identity—rather, it arrests the historicity of existence.

The typical trauma in the existence of borderline persons involves a special of relational trauma or “limit situation.” Limit situation (German: Grenzsituation ) is a concept Bevel oped by Jasper to conceptualize situations with specific toxicity for a given kind of vulnerable individual. Fuchs (2013 ) has used this concept to elaborate “existential vulner ability.” Jasper defined limit situations as antinomies inevitably given in human xis Fence: fight, guilt, finality, suffering. Limit situations are characterized by “inevitable an tinomies which prevent a person from going on as usual. A personal solution is necessary to accustom which implies change or development.” A limit situation is any of certain sit Cations in which a human being is said to have “differing experiences from those arising from ordinary situations”.

Borderline persons live out a traumatic existence because their now moments are pure presentification, lacking protection and retention. Also, they are incapable of distancing themselves from the present experience and by doing so to take a different stance toward it, that is, to view their present from a different angle. This is the nature of the existential vulnerability of borderline persons that finds its Noun terpart in specific limit situations characterized relational trauma.

The frequency of traumatic experiences is significantly higher than in other personality disorders or in depression. However, clinicians should not automatically assume that present traumatic experiences are re-enactments of early traumatic experiences. Cor Peale advises clinicians to transfer the focus of attention during therapy sessions from the search of early psychological adversities to the daily traumas suffered by these patients. This is not to deny the importance of child abuse or neglect in the pathogenesis The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder of this condition. Rather, it is a way to meet the patients’ need to recount their traumatic existence, and to enhance the patients’ capacity to describe their experiences and reflect upon them by placing them in time and history. This, of course, will also improve the clinician’s understanding of what is actually going on in the patient’s life-world. We sug Bests focusing on what we call “traumatic sequence,” performing with the patient a kind of slow-motion recollection of the daily traumatic events that constellate her existence. Typically, the traumatic sequence includes four steps: 1. The traumatic experience usually originates in the context of a traumatic relation ship. The borderline person conceives of partnerships as the encounter between two spontaneities, not regulated by any sort of internal or external Homos. Furthermore, she requires the other to be present and loyal, and capable of recognition, that is, a source of validation. In addition, presence, loyalty, and recognition must be accompanied by the other’s spontaneity, being free from so Dial conventions and acting according to the vital impulses of the present moment.

2. The traumatic sequence typically starts with an unexpected event of disappoint Bent and disillusion. The other does something (or fails to do something) and there by hurts the borderline person’s sensibility. The borderline patient may notice, for ex ample, that (p. 677) while waiting for her boyfriend she was overwhelmed by a quasiineffable variety of bad moods, characterized on the cognitive level by a state of dis sonance and indecision. She could not construct any consistent and stable explana son of her boyfriend’s behavior: “What’s going on?”, “Is he stuck in traffic?”, “Did he have a car accident?”, “Did he forget about our appointment?”, “Was he distract ed by something or someone else?”, “Another woman?”, “Is that an ambiguous way of letting me down?”, and so on. This is an initial to situate her emotions, that is, to rec ognize and relate them to the present situation, to understand them as one’s own personal way of being attuned to that given situation. Borderline persons fail to see in their emotional reactions the involuntary manifestation of otherness, that is, the re-enactment of one’s past and the manifestation of one’s character. Thus, they fail to engage in a proper “hermeneutics of the I am ”.

3. Emotional dissonance is prodromal to a phase of despair. While she was waiting for her boyfriend, her thinking completely collapsed. She could make no decision at all. She was in a kind of psychic paralysis. She felt that events are random, reality uncontrollable, the behavior of other persons unintelligible, and the whole world nonsensical. The outside world, as well as her own actions and reactions, were lived as though they were entirely out of control and unpredictable. Despair may be the ingress into dissociation, which is often considered a desperate defense or adapt son to traumatic experiences. In the state of dissociation there is a collapse of the capacity of mentalization. Dissociation may imply amnesia, and therefore this phase may be absent in the patient’s spontaneous recollection of the traumatic sequence.

4. The last step of the traumatic sequence is a mechanical, routine interpretation of the traumatic event. The borderline person typically assumes one of the following stereotyped roles: victim, perpetrator, bystander.

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder Victim. She may identify with the role of the victim, and in this case feel passively involved and totally without responsibility for what happens. ‘I am the victim, the other is the perpetrator’. It is the other who is guilty, since he or she acted out of voluntary intention. From this self-other relationship can emerge emotional states characterized by anger, resentment, and indignation until they could take the form of a transitory persecutor delusion. Usually, the persecutor is a significant other.

This makes the persecutor delusions of borderline persons radically different from paranoid delusions in persons with schizophrenia, which typically involve anonymous others. Furthermore, borderline persons are more vulnerable to Bevel oping feelings of shame. A mixture of anger plus shame may trigger transitory persecutor delusions in borderline persons, and especially delusions of reference, which typically arise in the type of borderline persons who are particularly vulner able to narcissistic rage associated with feelings of humiliation.

Perpetrator. She may admit she misbehaved. Nonetheless, she thinks she cannot be held entirely responsible. It was for her a sort of reflex, an automatic response she simply could not control: ‘I am bad, but I am not guilty because it’s not my fault’. Indeed, borderline persons seldom develop feelings of guilt or guilt deli ions as melancholic persons do. When she takes up the role of perpetrator, she may feel prey of a kind of “guiltless guilt.” In this case, guilt is neither placed on a flesh-and-blood other (e.g., one’s partner) nor on an anonymous other (as is the case with schizophrenic delusions of alien control). Guiltless guilt is the expert Once of the influx in one’s life of an uncontrollable destructive force that comes from within. Borderline persons are the witnesses of an ultimate truth: they feel the alienating power of the involuntary, that is, of the otherness that is constitu Dive of our personhood. (p. 678)

Bystander. Here, the borderline person is a merely passive spectator of the in electable and unpredictable events. She feels she cannot decide, control, or change the course of her life: ‘It always goes like this. This happened again. I can do nothing to avoid it’. She feels prone to develop feelings of impotence and help lessness, and to conceive of life as nonsensical. Oppressed with tedium, her mind becomes a mirror that reflects the ineluctability of the world and her own power lessness, that is, the futility of existence. The world and life itself simply is, it just happens. Tedium may be interrupted by cynical, sarcastic, or auto-sarcastic re marks. In this case, neither is the other construed as a perpetrator nor is the self felt as dominated by otherness. The responsibility is on sheer life itself, on its in escapable as well as unpredictable nature. Borderline persons construe them selves as the bystanders of their tragic destiny.

The relationships of borderline persons are often traumatic. Limit situations always orig ate in the context of traumatic self–other relationships. The main reason for this is that an essential feature of the fabric of the human self that is missing in the life-story of bor decline persons. This is the issue of the other’s recognition and of intimacy. Both are miss ing in the circumstances that Mares (2000 ) calls the “invalidating trauma.” The main The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder reason for this is that the two main sources of recognition are missing in the life-world of borderline persons: the other as a partner in their intimate relationships, and the other a companion in their inner conversation. The others are means to satisfy our own need for recognition. This is not the case for borderline persons who feel victimized by their part Hers. Yet this need for other-recognition can be mitigated by self-recognition. The border line persons’ acute need for the other’s recognition is a consequence of their lack of selfrecognition. The latter is essentially based on the presence, in one’s “intimate converse sons,” of an implicit other who would understand our actions and projects, to whom we could tell our life story. This implicit presence of the other presupposes early experiences of secure relationships to relevant others. In the case of borderline persons, an implicit other with whom one can share an intimate conversation, as well as a secure relational pattern, is radically lacking.

Values in Borderline Persons The desperate vitality inherent in dysphoria engenders an intense need to satisfy the af fictive, biological values brought about by vigorous feelings of being alive. These values run counter to and often clash with the ethical norms and social rules that structure the world in which we all live, provoking a frustrated sense of worthlessness and inanity. The emotional intensity does not allow borderline persons to distance themselves from what they feel here and now, and therefore they are not able to understand their feelings in the light of the values that constitute their own life-world. They live under the spell of what we may call a frustrated normativity. The norms by which the borderline person is driven are not the ethical norms or social conventions that structure and organize our interpersonal world. Rather, borderline persons refuse such conditions, thus entering into collision with what they consider the hypocrisy and the in authenticity of the pallid emotions by which other persons live. The borderline person cannot—or will not—let his bouts of energy be restricted by or conformed to the needs of other people, ethical norms, or social conventions, all of which he considers inauthentic and therefore as an unwarranted challenge to his truly natural being, his spontaneity.

(p. 679) This kind of emotionally frustrated normativity can be the initial cause of border line depression. It is the presence of a vitality that merely strives to affirm its own emo tonal intensity, to satisfy its own rudimentary feelings of being alive and the anonymous values revealed and engendered by these feelings, without any regard for the ethical or social norms that govern the world in which the borderline person desperately tries to live. Feelings are the most important values in the borderline person’s life-world. Social norms are deemed inauthentic values because they disregard the intimate feelings of the person whose behavior they are meant to inform and orient. The incapacity to distance oneself from one’s own feelings means that the borderline person is not capable of approx pirating those very feelings in the light of the norms that are part of being a person in a world shared with other persons. She is condemned simply to live the intense but disrupt ed life of her feelings. The norms, ethical as well as social, that allow us to distance our selves from our feelings and needs in the light of our care for living “a good life” with oth The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder er people are merely viewed as annoying attempts to drain the vitality that sustains the borderline world. The normative frustration experienced by borderline persons continua ously generates desperate attempts to maintain their vitality in the face of what they con seeder to be the encumbering strictures and platitudes of everyday life.

The values that are at play in the interpersonal world of borderline persons are directed to achieve goals like “to belong/to be accepted/to draw close and enjoyably reciprocate with another/to converse in a friendly manner, to tell stories, exchange sentiments, ideas, secrets/to communicate, to converse/to laugh and make jokes” ( Kane 2001: 234–235). These goals are felt by borderline persons as standard, basic aspirations of what, with Mares (2000 ), we may call intimacy, but these aspirations are often unrealistic and al most unattainable.

The borderline person’s values not only clash with the norms and conventions that rule our interpersonal world; they are also in conflict with one another. The borderline person requires the other to be present and loyal, and capable of recognition, that is, a source of validation. In addition, presence, loyalty, and recognition must be accompanied by the other’s spontaneity, being free from social conventions and acting according to the vital impulses of the present moment. Furthermore, the borderline person is not capable of au tonomy in the sense of establishing a coherent enough representation of herself and re Gaining faithful to it, and thus takes to an extreme the value of spontaneity. They con cave of partnerships as the encounter between two spontaneities, not regulated by any sort of internal or external Homos: “to be free from social restrictions/to resist coercion and constriction/to be independent and act according to desire/to defy convention” ( Kane 2001: 234).

The borderline person postulates as essential to life what is unstable and fleeting par ex cellence: the immediate encounter with the other, the encounter between two desires. The imperatives shouted at the other are the following: “Spontaneously fulfill my desire with your own desire!” and “Stay here! Do not abandon me! Keep on burning with an in exhaustible desire!” Need for recognition and fear of abandonment force the borderline person to insatiably aspire to a sort of emotional osmosis with the other. The other is needed as a source of recognition. The absence of the other makes the presence of the self impossible. The other’s absence, or incomplete presence, is often the reason for feel Dings of un-recognition and desperate loss of selfhood. The absent other, or the other who does not donate his entire self, is an abandoning other and an inauthentic other.

We know how an encounter based on these needs (immediacy and authenticity) can be unrealistic and almost unattainable. Furthermore, the borderline’s desire conceals the (p. 680) difference between oneself and the other, and between one’s desire for love and love in its actuality. In short: between an idealized form of love and the actual relation ship with the other person. What the borderline person idealizes is not the other, but Love itself. What the borderline person considers to be her most non-renounceable value is in deed her innermost symptom. The borderline existence is a dangerous shelter that meets its defeat because it postulates as non-renounceable in life what is more alien and inc The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder cessible to it, what in life itself is unstable and fleeting par excellence: the immediate en counter with the other, the encounter between two desires. Bibliography Correale A.. Area traumatic e compo istituzionale, 2nd edn. Rome: Bola Edizioni. Cutting J. (2009a). “Schemer, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology.” Philosophy, Psychic try & Psychology 16: 143–159. Cutting J. (2009b). “Psychopathologists and Philosophers.” Philosophy, Psychiatry & Psy chology 16: 175–178. Freeman L. and Elpidorou A.. “Affectivity in Heidegger second: Temporality, Boredom, and Beyond.” Philosophy Compass 10: 672–684. Fuchs T.. “The Phenomenology of Shame, Guilt and the Body in Body Dysmorphic Disorder and Depression.” Journal of Phenomenological Psychology 33: 223–243. Fuchs T.. “Fragmented Selves: Temporality and Identity in Borderline Personality.” Psychopathology 40: 379–387. Fuchs T.. “Existential Vulnerability: Toward a Psychopathology of Limit Situations Psychopathology” 46: 301–308. Heidegger M.. The fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Soil Dude. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. Jasper K.. Psychologies der Weltanschauungen. Berlin: Stringer. Kane S.. “4. Psychosis.” In S. Kane (ed.), Complete Plays, pp. 203–246. London: Methuen. Kimura B.. Écrits de psychopathologie phénoménologique, trans. J. Bouderlique. Paris: Presses Universitaires France. Kimura B.. L’Enter. Une approche phénoménologique de la schizophrénie, trans. C. Vincent. Grenoble: ÉEditions Jérôme Dillon. Mares R.. Intimacy and Alienation: Memory, Trauma and Personal Being. London: Rutledge. Mundt C.. “Jasper’ Concept of ‘Limit Situation’: Extension and Therapeutic Apple cations.” In T. Fuchs, T. Beyer, and C. Mundt (eating disorders.), Karl Jasper’ Philosophy and Psy chopathology, pp. 169–178. Heidelberg: Stringer. Pazzagli A. and Ross Mons M.. “Dysphoria and Aloneness in Borderline Personal ty Disorder.” Psychopathology 33: 220–226.

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder cessible to it, what in life itself is unstable and fleeting par excellence: the immediate en counter with the other, the encounter between two desires. Bibliography Correale A.. Area traumatic e compo istituzionale, 2nd edn. Rome: Bola Edizioni. Cutting J. (2009a). “Schemer, Phenomenology, and Psychopathology.” Philosophy, Psychic try & Psychology 16: 143–159. Cutting J. (2009b). “Psychopathologists and Philosophers.” Philosophy, Psychiatry & Psy chology 16: 175–178. Freeman L. and Elpidorou A.. “Affectivity in Heidegger second: Temporality, Boredom, and Beyond.” Philosophy Compass 10: 672–684. Fuchs T.. “The Phenomenology of Shame, Guilt and the Body in Body Dysmorphic Disorder and Depression.” Journal of Phenomenological Psychology 33: 223–243. Fuchs T.. “Fragmented Selves: Temporality and Identity in Borderline Personality.” Psychopathology 40: 379–387. Fuchs T.. “Existential Vulnerability: Toward a Psychopathology of Limit Situations Psychopathology” 46: 301–308. Heidegger M.. The fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Soil Dude. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. Jasper K.. Psychologies der Weltanschauungen. Berlin: Stringer. Kane S.. “4. Psychosis.” In S. Kane (ed.), Complete Plays, pp. 203–246. London: Methuen. Kimura B.. Écrits de psychopathologie phénoménologique, trans. J. Bouderlique. Paris: Presses Universitaires France. Kimura B.. L’Enter. Une approche phénoménologique de la schizophrénie, trans. C. Vincent. Grenoble: ÉEditions Jérôme Dillon. Mares R.. Intimacy and Alienation: Memory, Trauma and Personal Being. London: Rutledge. Mundt C.. “Jasper’ Concept of ‘Limit Situation’: Extension and Therapeutic Apple cations.” In T. Fuchs, T. Beyer, and C. Mundt (eating disorders.), Karl Jasper’ Philosophy and Psy chopathology, pp. 169–178. Heidelberg: Stringer. Pazzagli A. and Ross Mons M.. “Dysphoria and Aloneness in Borderline Personal ty Disorder.” Psychopathology 33: 220–226.

The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder Ricoeur P. (1992/1990). Oneself as Another, trans. K. Blimey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; Soi-même Somme un Outre. Paris: ÉEditions du Seuil. Ross Mons M. and D’Agostino A.. “Borderline Personality Disorder from a Psy chopathological-dynamic Perspective.” Journal of Psychopathology 20: 451–460. Sartre J.-P. (1956/1943). Being and Nothingness: A Phenomenological Essay on Ontology, trans. H. E. Barnes. New York: Philosophical Library.

(p. 681) Schemer M.. Person and Self-value: Three Essays. Berlin: Stringer Science & Business Media. Smith Q.. The Felt Meanings of the World: A Metaphysics of Feeling. West Lafayette: Purdue University Press. Solomon R. C.. True To Our Feelings: What Our Emotions Are Really Telling Us. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Stanghellini G.. “The Doublets of Anger.” Psychopathology 33: 155–158. Stanghellini G.. Lost in Dialogue. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Stanghellini G. and Ross Mons M. (2009a). Psicologia del patologico: Una prospettiva fenomenologica-dinamica. Milan: Raffaello Corina Editor. Stanghellini G. and Ross Mons M. (2009b). “Explication or Explanation?” Philosophy, Psychiatry & Psychology 16: 237–239. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R. (2013a). Emotions and Personhood: Exploring Fragility— Making Sense of Vulnerability. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R. (2013b). “Borderline Depression: A Desperate Vitality.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 20: 153–177. Tavris C.. Anger: The Misunderstood Emotion. Revised Edition. New York: Simon and Schuster. Weston D. and Cohen R. P.. “The Self in Borderline Personality Disorder: A Psycho dynamic Perspective.” In Z. fifth. Legal and S. J. Flatt (eating disorders.), The Self in Emotional Distress: Cognitive and Psychodynamic Perspectives, pp. 334–368. New York: Guilford Press.

Giovanni Stanghellini Department of Psychological, Humanistic and Territorial Sciences, Universityà G.

Giovanni Stanghellini Department of Psychological, Humanistic and Territorial Sciences, Universityà G.

d’Annunzio’ Milena Mancini The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder Department of Psychological Sciences, Humanities, and Territory, University of Chi eti-Pescara The Life-World of Persons with Borderline Personality Disorder Department of Psychological Sciences, Humanities, and Territory, University of Chi eti-Pescara The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions # The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions G. Di Pitta The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Dec 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Drug addiction undermines intentional consciousness. Whereas in normal conditions we have a fluid intentionality and our common sense is the obviously pre-reflective result of this situation, under the influence of a drug intoxication we lose this intentional stability and, as a consequence, suffer from a kind of intentional instability, which we can refer to with the term floating world. This floating world is characterized by splitting, vibration, and a multiplication of images which can be both sequential or overlapping. On the other hand, following chronic drug tolerance, we have a sort of an intentional dramatic capture or seizure of the world, which we can call frozen world. Lived time, space, the body, and other existential parameters differ enormously in these two contrasting ways of being. The crisis of the temporal-spatial vortex inevitably leads to the blow of the vacuum ( le coup de Aide ): the experience of unreality or no self-experience. The total collapse of the world is the common final result of the breaking down of the temporal and spatial strum Cure of “being-there” (“Casein”).

Keywords: intentionality, drug intoxication, drug tolerance, lived time, lived space, experience of unreality, Casein, life-world # The Phenomenological Approach WHAT sense is there at this moment in time in proposing a phenomenological approach to addiction, which is such a varied psychopathological and human condition, when empire cal research is centered entirely on the collection, analysis, and elaboration of measure able and verifiable models? The psychosocial hypotheses of the last century, which sup plied different interpretations of the social context and the addictive personality, seem to have lost their bite. No psychosocial model is able to help explain the tremendous diff ion of various forms of drug abuse among the general population. Both the models of family and of society have undergone a great change in the last fifty years. However, there is no psycho-social parameter that is closely linked in any way to the explosion and multiplication of drug abuse. Furthermore, the psychosocial models have been lacking in The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions any attempt to set up therapeutic protocols that aim at recovering the individual and helping him to overcome drug abuse. It has not been possible to repeat the success achieved by the neurobiological approach, which substitutes one drug with another (e.g. heroin–methadone) in the treatment of drug abuse. The study of receptors and ligands has not kept up with the incredible proliferation of synthetic drugs, for which, at this time, no substitute exists. The spread in the abuse of non-pharmacological additives has made the use of drugs that can contrast the effect of each substance virtually impossible. The typical present-day drug addict is a polyabuser, in whose brain it is practically imps Bible to pinpoint where the behavioral and neuropsychic effects of any single drug take place. Nowadays the world of addiction is highly differentiated with synthetic and recce National substances being used alongside the more traditional drugs. And other addictions have come to exist besides drug addiction—gambling, shopping, sex, the Internet, etc. Some eating disorders can also be considered a form of addiction. It is obvious that in the field of neuropsychiatry the effects of chemical agents like drugs are completely different from behavioral disorders caused by gambling or the Internet. The psychiatric effect of drugs has been compared to synthetic psychoses, which are considered to be esogenic (p. 683) psychosis, having a very different psychopathological structure from the schizo phrenic and Effective psychosis of more standard psychoses.

The question of the phenomenological approach should be explained. The phenomenology cal-existential approach is first and foremost philosophical, and is based on philosophical thinkers such as Buber, Dostoevsky, Frank, Heidegger, Husserl, Jasper, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Sartre, Tillich, and others. It is concerned with the understanding of people in relationship to the world in which they live and with the individual’s search for what it means to be alive. It is committed to exploring questions about living and dying. The phe nomenological approach, due to its inclination to grasp the intrinsic nature of phenom na, tends to form a common denominator which is in opposition to the proliferation of normal addictive behavior and is a sort of typical style of life of the addicted person, ind pendently of a whole series of differential factors (personality, chemical or behavioral ad diction, psychiatric complications). Phenomenology attempts to understand the “how” of each phenomenon, that is, the way in which it happens independently of its causes. For the doctor, a profound understanding of the way in which the phenomenon of addiction is formed represents a step into the patient’s world. It allows the doctor to work together with his patient toward a better understanding of the patient’s problems and thus clears the way for successful treatment. This may seem rather simplistic when compared to the approach of empirical research which is very careful to analyze and elaborate all the pos Bible variables. However, having the chance to view a unitary perspective is a great help since it allows the doctor to have an immediate overall picture, and this is especially use ful when meeting the patients since the characteristic of these patients, which is based entirely on “all and now,” certainly does not provide much time for the working out of a therapeutic relationship. If the doctor manages to break through the patient’s “addictive bubble” in the first meeting, he will then be able in some measure to appreciate the patient’s intentionality. In turn this will allow the doctor to help steer his patient away from the polarization of his intentionality toward the object of his addiction, thus setting any attempt to set up therapeutic protocols that aim at recovering the individual and helping him to overcome drug abuse. It has not been possible to repeat the success achieved by the neurobiological approach, which substitutes one drug with another (e.g. heroin–methadone) in the treatment of drug abuse. The study of receptors and ligands has not kept up with the incredible proliferation of synthetic drugs, for which, at this time, no substitute exists. The spread in the abuse of non-pharmacological additives has made the use of drugs that can contrast the effect of each substance virtually impossible. The typical present-day drug addict is a polyabuser, in whose brain it is practically imps Bible to pinpoint where the behavioral and neuropsychic effects of any single drug take place. Nowadays the world of addiction is highly differentiated with synthetic and recce National substances being used alongside the more traditional drugs. And other addictions have come to exist besides drug addiction—gambling, shopping, sex, the Internet, etc. Some eating disorders can also be considered a form of addiction. It is obvious that in the field of neuropsychiatry the effects of chemical agents like drugs are completely different from behavioral disorders caused by gambling or the Internet. The psychiatric effect of drugs has been compared to synthetic psychoses, which are considered to be esogenic (p. 683) psychosis, having a very different psychopathological structure from the schizo phrenic and Effective psychosis of more standard psychoses.

The question of the phenomenological approach should be explained. The phenomenology cal-existential approach is first and foremost philosophical, and is based on philosophical thinkers such as Buber, Dostoevsky, Frank, Heidegger, Husserl, Jasper, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Sartre, Tillich, and others. It is concerned with the understanding of people in relationship to the world in which they live and with the individual’s search for what it means to be alive. It is committed to exploring questions about living and dying. The phe nomenological approach, due to its inclination to grasp the intrinsic nature of phenom na, tends to form a common denominator which is in opposition to the proliferation of normal addictive behavior and is a sort of typical style of life of the addicted person, ind pendently of a whole series of differential factors (personality, chemical or behavioral ad diction, psychiatric complications). Phenomenology attempts to understand the “how” of each phenomenon, that is, the way in which it happens independently of its causes. For the doctor, a profound understanding of the way in which the phenomenon of addiction is formed represents a step into the patient’s world. It allows the doctor to work together with his patient toward a better understanding of the patient’s problems and thus clears the way for successful treatment. This may seem rather simplistic when compared to the approach of empirical research which is very careful to analyze and elaborate all the pos Bible variables. However, having the chance to view a unitary perspective is a great help since it allows the doctor to have an immediate overall picture, and this is especially use ful when meeting the patients since the characteristic of these patients, which is based entirely on “all and now,” certainly does not provide much time for the working out of a therapeutic relationship. If the doctor manages to break through the patient’s “addictive bubble” in the first meeting, he will then be able in some measure to appreciate the patient’s intentionality. In turn this will allow the doctor to help steer his patient away from the polarization of his intentionality toward the object of his addiction, thus setting The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions up the premise for a therapeutic relationship. When the doctor first meets the patient the most important thing for him is to achieve something on which to build up a contact with his patient from the very beginning rather than focus on the neurobiological determiners and the personological configurations of the patient. Because the addict’s world is a pure ly Censorial world based primarily on perception, any attempt at a more rational ap roach is not likely to prove successful. Any dropping out from the treatment at this stage would have dramatically negative consequences for the patient, both physically and psy chosocially. The more an addict becomes socially integrated, the less apparent are those elements that derive from social degradation and the consideration of being a social out cast. Thus the catastrophic downward curve of their existence is reflected and dangerous ly amplified in their position in society.

Toward the end of their existential journey and of their drug addiction the lives of people, who were apparently quite different beforehand, flow together into a common dimension of loss. This is a sort of common destiny. Any initial difference disappears and what emerges is the phenomenon in its common denominator. The collapse of existence, cleared of its a prior formal structures of space and time, becomes evident. The knoll edge of the constitution of “the life-world” of the addict is fundamental not only for any transformative approach that attempts to tackle the problem, but also for any attempt to reinstate the treatment, the world-project, the constitution of the other. In 1927 Heideg ger, in Being and Time, defined “care” ( Forge ) as a fundamental existential dimension. According to Heidegger we are human insofar (p. 684) as we take care of something, or someone, including oneself. The “world-project” is built around the concept of taking care, or the reaction to the “being-thrown-into-the-world” by being born, with the differ ing future prospect which allows the individual to express his own individuality. The an thropological-phenomenological definition of the addict can begin from a context which is the exact opposite of this: negligence, the loss of care, and as a result the loss of a worldproject built around the treatment. The phenomenological approach is particularly suc cessful when it has something on which to build upon. Giving positive results when it can begin from a relationship with those patients who are particularly unwilling to enter into any kind of relationship whatsoever, having been continuously rejected and having be come accustomed to a nomadic existence, which has profoundly undermined their own personality.

The Addictive World It would be wrong to consider the complexity of the addictive experience exclusively in psychological terms (intrapsychic and interpersonal conflict) or, as is becoming more common, exclusively in neurobiological terms (circuits of pleasure). The phenomenology cal approach extends above all to a horizon of an anthropological nature, interpreting the addictive phenomenon as a result of the deep crisis of the own being-there ( Casein ) that has unhinged the being-in-the-world of the postmodern subject. Drugs and other narcotic substances have in fact been used since human life be gan on the planet, accompanying us in our rituals for sacred occurrences, when we went The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions to war, in love, and during Dionysian frenzies. The fact that these substances, which have been present for thousands of years, have represented a medical epidemiological problem only since the last decades of the last century implies that the cultural ritualization of their use is no longer applicable. This change has occurred at the same time as the Bevel opment of techniques of synthesis of those drugs and of the explosion in mass commune cation. For the doctor who has been trained to think phenomenologically, faced with the world of drug addicts he is dealing with tracing all that remains of those beings he en counters: human beings who have lost their defining personalities, beings that are simply either integrated or disintegrated, beings who are either “in” or “out,” inhabiting vagabond worlds, living clandestine lives, wherever they are and whatever they do re Gaining forever transitory, temporary fragments of lived life and consciousness: when the doctor comes face to face with them, he too is forced to become a wanderer, without any roots, almost obliged to be as much an interpreter of postmodern restlessness as his pa taints.

There is an invisible thread that, on the edge of nothingness, ties together the passion for drugs/drug addiction and lived experiences like boredom ( Nola, Langweiligkeit, Spleen ), emptiness, angst, and pervasive and intense anger ( Verstimmung, Hubris ): these features constitute both the psychopathology of the addict as a man living on the edge and unis tamable features found in contemporary philosophy (Heidegger, Sartre, Camus) and mod ern literature (Baudelaire, Music, Joyce, Kafka). Mythical heroes of the generations be longing to the second half of the twentieth century—short-lived bright stars like James Dean, Jim Morrison, Kurt Cobain, all of whom embodied the impossibility/incapacity/in ability of living their own not-to-be-found dimension, losing their lives at the very moment of their maximum, yet still immature, splendor. This balancing on the edge of the abyss connects, albeit from a distance and through the deformed effect of the reproducibility of the masses, (p. 685) the existence of drug addicts to the tragic destinies of figures like Keats, Shelley, Byron, or Weather and Otis, or Michaelstaedter, the bohemians and the scapigliati who experienced the fin de siècle weariness of over one hundred years ago, like Corazzini, Campana, Gozzano. All figures who have left us, both in their works and in the example of their short lives and their untimely deaths on the threshold of adulthood, the tragic sense of their inability to adapt to the modern world.

There is an invisible thread that, on the edge of nothingness, ties together the passion for drugs/drug addiction and lived experiences like boredom ( Nola, Langweiligkeit, Spleen ), emptiness, angst, and pervasive and intense anger ( Verstimmung, Hubris ): these features constitute both the psychopathology of the addict as a man living on the edge and unis tamable features found in contemporary philosophy (Heidegger, Sartre, Camus) and mod ern literature (Baudelaire, Music, Joyce, Kafka). Mythical heroes of the generations be longing to the second half of the twentieth century—short-lived bright stars like James Dean, Jim Morrison, Kurt Cobain, all of whom embodied the impossibility/incapacity/in ability of living their own not-to-be-found dimension, losing their lives at the very moment of their maximum, yet still immature, splendor. This balancing on the edge of the abyss connects, albeit from a distance and through the deformed effect of the reproducibility of the masses, (p. 685) the existence of drug addicts to the tragic destinies of figures like Keats, Shelley, Byron, or Weather and Otis, or Michaelstaedter, the bohemians and the scapigliati who experienced the fin de siècle weariness of over one hundred years ago, like Corazzini, Campana, Gozzano. All figures who have left us, both in their works and in the example of their short lives and their untimely deaths on the threshold of adulthood, the tragic sense of their inability to adapt to the modern world.

With the final sunset over both the rural and industrial world, the traditional cities which had been the historical framework of modern industrial and bourgeois civilization, gave way to the infinite series of no man’s land that characterizes modern cities and their out skirts. The current metropolitan typos is by its own definition a “nowhere”—a discontinue ous and confused untidy succession of abandoned post-industrial wasteland, shopping centers, areas which are out of bounds and delimited, without history or sense. These places have no sense of meeting or of relationships between people, no cafes or places to walk and talk, no love or death. This is the background where the drug addict unequivo ally realizes the figure of being-in-the-crisis as being-in-the-wreck or being-in-nothing Bess. In the heart of darkness of one of the deepest holes of contemporary nihilism the addict’s existence might represent the place where the last battle is being fought to save The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions all that makes man what he is, without all the historical encrustations on which the trad tonal idea of being-man were founded, and which have gradually been abandoned.

The first generation that embraced the consumption style of the heroin addict emerged in the West in the 1960s and 1970s. The failure of the youth movement’s demonstrations, the subversive terrorist acts committed by extremists together with the return to a quiet bourgeois existence of many of the instigators of the revolutionary movement provided the ex-hippies with an alibi to completely destroy themselves. In this way opiates/nar comics met the need to alleviate the pain and anger of all those who had experienced the “season of illusions” and witnessed the failure of social reform and the consequent return to selfish interests and conformity. The world that had restored bourgeois ideals and forced them on the survivors of a counter-culture could not be accepted. Thus, needles, spoons, distilled water, and lemon became the instruments of a rite of passage. The first time it was normal for someone else to administer the drugs, thereafter you would do it on your own. Pulling your belt tightly round your arm with your teeth, passing the needle or “sword” from one to another for a shot, you found yourself on the threshold of a new and fantastic discovery. The whole world became indifferent and you became indifferent to the progressive and unstoppable deconstruction and degradation of your own life. To day almost no one from this first generation is still alive. Nearly all have succumbed to overdoses or AIDS.

What else remains for adolescents today apart from the noisy silence that fills up the bor ing everyday routine of adults? The night. How is night time experienced? How are its spaces organized? How are those empty intervening metropolitan spaces filled? Or rather, how do all those needs/requests that are suppressed by everyday culture express themselves? Who are the figures, the characters, and what processes do they set off, for example, in the world of nightclubs some of which are referred to in slang as being bor decline, because they are the home of extreme on-the-edge effects? What then are the be havioral combinations or the experiential, symptomatological, and psychopathological clusters that emerge from the miscellany of these chronically a-structured personalities, trapped in a sort of continuous present? All of this is associated with a vision of one’s own life as being ensnared in the instant of an temporal present, where nothing has any meaning other than the emergent (p. 686) moment that is, compared to what is continual ly being taken away from the senses because it is disappearing; where one’s own life is seen as being separated from any working objective or pretext for responsibility; and where the only sense/sensation/feeling that remains, after all the needs for survival have crumbled, is either of panic or undirected ludic; where everything that you do is either an action or is not carried out because any idea of planning for the future is impossible.

The turning-point for this second generation of new addicts who do not consider them selves real drug addicts at all, is to be found in their search for the experience of a high (or a buzz) which leads them to use a mixture of drugs. The tragic outcome of the lifestyle of these polyabusers seems to confirm that human beings are not mature enough to live in complete freedom, where freedom also means being free from the symbolic forms that ritualized and ceremonialize all the ups and downs of life. At this point the drug addict, The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions surpassing the narrow medical world, sets out the ontological problem of the freedom of man in the world.

The analysis that phenomenology carries out at the base of consciousness and of expert Once and of the addict’s world, in this playing by ear, beyond the disintegration of ate Dories, captures the eternal instant, the disappearance of the past as a memory and of the future as a project, the transformation of cyclical time into linear time. The drug addict’s craving after a meaning among the ruins left behind by his addiction, almost caused by the emptiness of non-sense, is met. The doctor and the patient, both wayfarers among the ruins of the world, become traveling companions in the difficult search for a meaning which at this point has become a common objective From the phenomenological point of view, the addict appears as a tragic figure devoured by his own boundless appetite, dominated by a grandiose and unlimited picture of him self, condemned forever to follow his erratic consciousness. He will continuously and without success keep searching in the crepuscular nirvana of the high for his lost pres Once, profoundly and irredeemably damaged in its emphatic relation with the world, ex posed to the misery of its continuous failure and faced with the insignificance of everyday reality compared to his artificial paradise.

Today, while the more accredited approaches appear to be experiencing increasing diff cult, the phenomenological approach permits the doctor to work in conditions that allow him to have satisfactory visibility of both the patient and his path to recovery, as well as allowing him to apply himself successfully to the continuing relationship while at the same time maintaining contact with the patient despite the inconstancy and the chronic ty of the various problematic situations. Once again “treatment,” “the world,” “the project,” “lived space,” “lived time,” “the situation,” “the lived body,” “conscience,” “des tiny,” and “freedom” are all essential in order to enable any kind of favorable encounter with anyone who, like all addicts, has either lost himself completely or is in the process of doing so. Borgia, in 1978, published a seminal paper entitled “La tossicomania come es perienza psicoterapeutica” (“Drug Addiction as a Psychotherapeutic Experience”), which is of extraordinary relevance. Indeed, it can be considered the groundwork for all subs went research on the subject. The essential aspects of this paper can be summarized as follows: 1) Drug addiction is an experience that is deeply inherent to the human experience.

Or rather, drug addiction is a possibility inscribed in the destiny of every one of us.

2) The feeling of “emptiness” is the core of the drug addict’s experience.

(p. 687) 3) Being able to relate to the drug addict is only possible outside the probes signal role and after having abandoned every certainty.

4) The discovery in the drug addict’s world of a distinctive feature of our time: the loss of the sense of the world.

An article entitled “L ’esperienza del Lab sessuale nei tossicodipendenti” (“The Expert Once of the Sexual Lab in Drug Addicts) was published by Callieri in 1993. “It seems to be the case that the heroin-addicts are lacking in any ability to effectively plan their lives The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions because they consider their bodies simply as being an obstacle, or rather, as an ibex haustible source of urgent needs. They can remain a presence, while rarely taking part” ( Callieri 1993: 75). Thus, the physical body ( Köper ) takes the place of the lived body ( Lab ) in drug addicts, and all meaningful communication with others breaks down, leaving room only for the barest of superficial exchanges. The addict’s sexuality tends to remain within the closed circle of being-high and functions in the present living exclusive ly for the next fix. The encounter for the body-I-have is reduced to a mere risk. The body is at the disposal of another body, occasional epiphenomenon of life/existence. What is missing entirely is “that which is beyond,” the encounter with another body seen as one’s own opening up toward the other body. The osmosis between sexuality and existence is completely absent here due to the coagulation or even cicatrizing effect of craving (the compulsive desire for drugs). It is almost as if a single longing has summed up and ab sobbed all the others resulting in the loss of We-Bess.

Addictive Being-in-the-World: General Features The life-world of drug addicts is conditioned by the presence or absence of narcotic sub stances. These substances, or the behavior resulting from drug abuse while they are be ing used, totally absorb the patient’s intentional consciousness and modify its spatial-tem oral structure. Since the patients during their lives are not always under the influence of drugs, or totally involved with their addiction, it follows that their state of intentional con sciousness varies according to how much the object of their addiction has influenced their lived experience/life. Therefore we can summarize the way in which the patients ex perience addiction fundamentally in the following three dimensions: 1) When the patient is directly under the effect of drugs or when his resulting behave ior is caused by the addiction. This is a passive dimension. Whereas in normal conj sons we have a natural relationship with the surrounding world, and our common sense is the obviously pre-reflexive result of this situation, under the influence of a drug intoxication we lose this stable contact with reality ( Selbstverstaendlich ) and, as a result, suffer from an intense instability, which we can identify with the term floating world.

2) When the object of addiction is not present. This is the phase of abstinence or craving, and is characterized by the lack of the substance and the resulting ire pressible longing to have it. In this phase the patient undergoes an intentional polar ization, which is both absolute and specific, on how to get his hands on the drugs again. The addict’s purpose (p. 688) is polarized by his desired objective. Everything else is excluded or considered only as tools which can help achieve the final goal.

3) When the patient is desensitized to the substance or the addictive behavior. This is the phase when the problem becomes chronic, in which the effects of the addictive behavior have faded, though the patient is not yet able to live a normal life. He is ap Bathetic, indifferent, abulic, lacking in will-power and the world seems Frey to him.

This is the dimension of the frozen world-of-life.

The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions # The Floating Life-world: Eyelids like a Setting # Sun What precisely do addicts mean when they say: “I am high”? What is the psychopathology cal meaning of this state of consciousness which for them represents a sort of steadystate? described a condition of “twilight calm” in subjects who experienced LSD, after the hallucinatory state. On this base, we can consed er the experience of a high as an equivalent of the twilight state of consciousness. In the classic description by Jasper and Schneider, the twilight state of con sciousness is a restriction of the field of consciousness. In the twilight state of conscious Bess there is no dramatic alteration of arousal. The field of consciousness, furthermore, can still spread itself. The twilight state of consciousness is a sort of threshold between the light of reality and the shadow of dream and psychosis. The twilight state of con sciousness promotes illusions, delusions, hallucinations. Depersonalization and derealiza son are normal experiences in the twilight state of consciousness, in which it is more like ly that transitional phenomena occur, from basic symptoms to final full-blown psychotic phenomena. Addicts ex perience this vulnerable condition every day, every month, every year. The perception of reality in addicts is discontinuous and incomplete and this twilight state becomes a sort of normal way of life. This state of consciousness is like a display that is continuously turned on and off, short flashes appear and disappear. Because of instability the twilight state becomes a transitional state.

Making eye contact with a drug addict who has taken drugs inevitably reveals his eyes to be “ les yeux en Voucher de soleil ” (eyelids like a sunset). In that instant, while his expert Once has been swallowed up by the nirvana of the flash or the kaleidoscopic dizziness of a high, we who are standing in front of him, no longer exist for him. The world tends to dis appear. His intentionality is completely “floating,” the world around is only perceived weakly and intermittently. There is no longer any noema present in the patient’s aware Bess, only a noesis which melts into the hazy line on the horizon. On the other hand the fantastic interior experience is sharply in focus and, if sedatives are involved, there is a kind of fusion with the ocean, while if stimulants are used there is a kaleidoscope of shin ing photons and hypercolors. The floating world is characterized by splitting, vibration, and a multiplication of images which can be both sequential or overlapping. There exists a violent twilight state of consciousness in patients who are suffering from the effects of drugs and are, consequently, in the situation of a floating world. Their lived body has be come disjointed. Their senses have (p. 689) started to become something like a wild kale doscope. The lived space is hemorrhagic and the perception is of a loss of space, of be ing nowhere. Lived time is liquid and indefinite. “Life appears as if it were only a mo Bent, freed and released from the present and the future”.

There is no present, no past, no future. Having lost the connection of interior time all the drug addict has left is the transient moment of satisfaction. However, no sooner has the drug addict achieved a moment of pleasure than it suddenly vanishes and he is con The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions damned to impulsive and compulsive repetition. When the patient experiences a high, he feels so absorbed in the present that he is no longer able to see the future. No longer be ing able to experience the past and having lost touch with the future, the patient ends up being unable to grasp the present. “The addict is trapped in this repetition with no chance of moving forward” ( Gebsattel 1954: 35). The instantaneity, the pure instant, is the gap between the last dose and the next one: the liquid instant of “the high” rules. The moment of altered consciousness and the time of the deathless instant dominate every thing else. Thus, the patient is trapped in a sort of circular liquidity of lived time, and suf Hers the pure illusion of linear movement. This state of consciousness or this way of being can overlap with a manic state, although they are in fact very different conditions. The manic appears hyperactive, while the addict is passive during this moment of bliss. The instant that the drug addict experiences is dilated and swallows both past and future, while that of the manic is an instant that is being continually projected into the future freed from the past. The manic feels himself as being omnipotent, while the drug addict wallows in a feeling of blissful impotence.

The World of Craving: A Circular Chain What exactly happens in the state of acute drug deprivation? The acute withdrawal (the “cold turkey” syndrome) is a state of real discomfort. The patient’s existence is centered around where the pusher is—the exact square, the road, the underpass. An acute and in tolerable sense of emptiness continues to get ever more urgent. Anger, irritability, and loneliness are the dominant emotions that inundate the addict’s state of mind. There is a contrast between the cold space of substance craving which can be defined with the word “absence,” and the hot space of substance enjoying which can be defined with the word “presence.” When the patient experiences craving both past and future have been lost. The past is reduced exclusively to “the last time in which I have taken drugs.” Everything is manipulated and everyone is reduced to being an obstacle in the way of the addict’s on ly remaining relationship—with the drugs he takes. The relapse and the nostalgia are strictly related to the experience of craving. The memory of the pleasure deriving from the drug is unforgettable. Intentionality, in this experience of craving, is totally directed to the search for substances. All the behavior is drug-oriented. Generally the patient is very active in order to find the drug as soon as possible. They always need more and more substances in order to feel themselves still alive. Often only a relapse can represent the way out from this terrible condition. Circular time is the temporal structure of crab ing: a chain which links the past and the future, continually displacing the past into the future, the future into the past.

(p. 690) The Frozen World-of-Life: Like Snowmen On the other hand, following chronic drug tolerance, which results in the desensitization of substances, we have a sort of intentional dramatic seizure of the world, which we can call the frozen world. In the encounter with a chronic addict, an examiner will encounter The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions the following: an empathy failure; boredom; emptiness; lack of meaning; loneliness; isola son. The lived time, space, body, and other existential parameters differ enormously in comparison with the same parameters of the floating world. Following chronic intoxica son, the patient’s consciousness becomes viscous, and the lived body is blocked—now he finds himself in the state we call the frozen world. The body is modified at a neurobiologi cal level by a chemical graft which inserts a relevant new artificial element into the lived body. The object body ( Köper ) is the vehicle of powerful substances which can success fully alter all sensations and perceptions, and the whole world-experience, reducing the addict’s self into nothing more than a denatured, mineralized body ( Köper-ding ). His in tentionality is coagulated, time is insular and has been reduced to a pure frozen present without past and without future until the complete loss of the passing of time is expert Inced. Others have become unattainable objects which are lifeless, like unattainable dis ant snowmen. Tragically these patients become mere bystanders to their own existence. In order to feel themselves still alive they need more and more substances. But after years and years of addicted life, the effect of those substances has started to wear off. There is tolerance, habit, ineffectiveness, along with a progressive destruction of both the existential background and the existential network, as well as a development in progress chive psychopathology and brain injury. Being-in-nothingness can became the typical state of addicts in the frozen condition. In this case, the frozen condition has become a sort of terminal point in the existence of addicts.

The Paradise Lost: The Death of the Feeling It is necessary to differentiate this state from other ordinary states of depression. In fact, if we examine “depressive states” in addicted people a paradox emerges: does something like “depression” in addictive persons actually exist? We find several depressive-like con Editions: the end of the “honeymoon,” the chronic state of abstention, the chronic abuse as the drug becomes increasingly ineffective. In these conditions the addict’s life is mean Wingless, without colors, without taste, without smell, without emotions. The chronic pain of the addict is not the same thing as depression. In addition, the end dose of methadone or buprenorphine puts the patient in an uncomfortable situation. During psychotherapeu tic treatment, the patient can encounter a lack of motivation. On the other hand, during community treatment or in prison, these patients, deprived of drugs, appear similar to pa taints suffering from depression. When the patient manages to resist a relapse he lives a sort of depressed lucidity: this is the sign of detoxification. The structure of a lived time experience in these addiction-related situations is completely different from the structure of lived time in normal life and in a depressive experience. In depression the lived time is trapped in an irremovable past, which blocks the flow of time toward the present and the future. In these addicted-related (p. 691) conditions the essential characteristic is the re Auction of the present into an island without past and without future. The final collapse of the addictive “Casein” is a sort of being-in-nothingness. The crisis of the temporal-spatial vortex eventually and inevitably leads to the “blow of the vacuum” ( le coup de Aide ): the experience of unreality or no self-experience. The total collapse of the world is the final result of the breaking down of the temporal and spatial structure of “being- The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions there” (“Casein”). All addictions lead to the final collapse of the Beingin-the-world-with-others structure, and many addicts remain without the spatial-temporal dimension, thus making it virtually impossible for them to stay in a space-with-others and to project themselves in time.

The Therapeutic Encounter with the Drug A doctor who meets an addict has to be without any prejudices and has to do his best to make contact both with the emotional nucleus of the person he has in front of him and with the “drug experience.” This has to be done at the same time, though separately. The person who is talking in front of him is not merely a person who is a patient. He is also in a certain sense the drug itself. The doctor, therefore, makes contact both with the person and with the drug. The first thing he has to do is to make the drug into something akin to an experience endowed with a sense. The relationship that exists between the patient and the drug to which he is addicted is not a relationship between a free mind and a free ob Sect. The bond that ties the drug addict to the drug represents a distortion both of time and space, which is able to deform his whole world. Whatever idea the doctor has as re Bards the drug, it cannot in any way coincide with the drug the patient describes. If the doctor does acquire an adequate understanding of the substance in question and man ages to look at it, at least in part, with the eyes of his patient, and in part with his own ability, he cannot avoid sharing a respect for the drug in a similar way to the psychiatrist who respects the delusion when his patient finally makes it clear to him. This explication or revelation of the delusion is always a gift that the patient makes to the doctor, it is the revealing of a hidden secret. The doctor must not forget that the patient has dedicated a great part of his life to the drug in question, ending up with having emptied himself out completely because of it. The drug is an overwhelming passion, a total and exclusive love, to which the patient has given everything. He has nothing else and he is nothing else. Having completely identified himself with the drug he has inevitably canceled himself out. He has thrown himself headlong into it just as a man can throw himself into the void. The drug is the precipitate of the last identity that the patient has left. If the drug has become a mask, then the patient has in turn become the drug. This means that if we want to talk about the drug then we have to talk about the patient’s self. Nothing at all can come be tween the patient and the drug. They coincide with each other. Only the meeting with the doctor can demarcate the boundary between the subject and the drug. The doctor’s first task is to create an epoché (a bracketing or suspension) once he has stopped considering the drug merely as a chemical agent and has started to consider it as a vital element: the element that characterizes the addict’s life-world. The drug, therefore, represents the meeting place. It follows then that the objective is that of creating this together with the patient, or rather, to recreate this together in order that a part of the subjectivity of the doctor contaminates the remaining subjectivity of the patient.

(p. 692) The patient should stand up at the end of the meeting feeling that he has been speaking to someone who has finally understood the drug, and has therefore stopped un derestimating it. The idea the patient has of the drug, and which remains with him after The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions he has left the doctor, is no longer the same idea he had before meeting the doctor. It is an idea of the drug that remains powerful, but also necessarily includes fragments of the other person’s idea. If the doctor has been able to create in his own consciousness the idea of the drug through the eyes of the patient, then, in a collateral way, the patient can not avoid finding himself having a new idea of the drug as seen through the doctor’s eyes. This is something that never occurred during the pseudo-sharing experience with other drug addicts. As a result of this the first crack will appear in the dyadic-symbiotic drugpatient crystal, with the introduction of the doctor’s subjectivity. At this point the patient starts to feel confused, while at the same time a newly kindled desire to meet the doctor again will start to appear. A wish to see that person again who has made the addict feel something new. That presence ( Casein ) which has caused this new sensation. Deep down the addict still remains on the hunt for feelings. Meanwhile the doctor will have managed to wrongfoot his patient’s prejudice with regard to all those people who don’t take drugs and are therefore not able to understand him. In this way, the doctor has succeeded in ini sating a process that is the opposite of the action of the drug over the patient: drugs pet reify a patient’s consciousness, making it inorganic/lacking in coherence/disorganized while the doctor subjectifies the drug, makes it coherent/organized—he responsibilizes it, he humanizes it, thus successfully reclaiming a part of the patient for humanity. This resurfacing of the “you,” purposefully triggered in the patient’s “ego” by the doctor, troubles/agitates/upsets the patient so much so that it almost achieves an effect comparable/similar to that of the drug itself.

Most importantly of all the doctor should be ready to hem in the void, to reach the core of the patient’s life, because that is where anything that is left of the patient (even if it is nothing more than an inner strength) can still be found. This phenomenology of the first contact is experienced with great intensity, and that which continues after the encounter, also out of the setting, has been called “point blank phenomenology”. Ba sically, it is about entering into the inclination of the other person, in other words being able to make a direct contact. This is made possible above all through the use of one’s own personal resources rather than professional ones, and yet runs the risk of losing the patient through having revealed yourself rather than losing him anyway though remain ing within the norms. For this to be successful it is necessary to have already achieved great freedom of movement, which in turn derives from an extremely disciplined training.

A Lived Time Psychotherapy: The Casein-group # Analysis Casein-group analysis represents a further development in the theoretical phenomenological and existential frame applied to addicted patients who are also mental ly ill. Casein-group analysis is a powerful form of therapy that focuses on concerns rooted in human existence, giving movement to the blocked time (p. 693) the addicts suffer. Pathicity allows an access into the patient’s time-exp rience. This phenomenological approach to the psychotherapy of ad The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions 1 Edicts has been applied in those addiction centers with everyday contact with patients, and has always given rise to an intense emotional atmosphere. In many of these patients the human sense of identity is lost even where there is no psychotic symptomatology. In these cases, the only way to survive is to achieve vital contact with another person, feel ing empathy for the emotional, Effective dimension of another person. The “epoché” is the preliminary condition of this setting. Especially when this requires the doctor to abandon his own role. The lived experiences mix freely in a totally emotional context. Subsequently within the group the shared emotions reveal a truly meaningful lived dimension, made up of pain and pleasure, helplessness and happiness, loneliness and nearness, anger and friendship: a sort of “fundamental Effective position” (Heidegger’s Befindlichkeit, 1927). This group approach is centered on the search for an authentic intersubjective encounter, as the crucial embodied event This condition, which happens face-to-face between two human beings in the middle of the group, is the necessary step for any subsequent cure. The phenomena logical background has been extremely useful especially in the close encounter ( face-toface ) with the patient, who is respected more as a real person than as just another Blini cal case. These experiences in the emotional context of the phenomenological group freely mix with each other, producing change and transformation in all participants. The passage from initial negative emotions to final positive emotions in each group session is crucial. It is like a journey from helplessness to hope, from pain to light, from loneliness to intimate nearness. The doctor here is not outside the group, but completely inside it. Both the doctor and the patient abandon their roles and are in the phenomenological group as human beings body-to-body, existence-to-existence, as persons who love, cry, feel, without the barrier that exists between therapists and their patient s From being one-next-to-another (Nebeneinandersein ) and from being one-in-frontof-another (Voreinandersein ) to being-one-with-another (Miteinandersein ). This gives them the chance to live in a space and time in which it is not important to answer the question, “who am I?” but the questions “what do I feel?” and “how do I feel?” Starting from a common emotional hinterland, in which we can find our lost parts, in which we can give to others the parts they have lost, in which we can find our own internal expert Once, and in which there is the chance to look for and discover these parts which are still 2 alive. The group participation is open to everybody, no matter what his condition. Any one from anywhere is admitted to this new kind of group. At the end of the group session it is evident that not even heroin is able to calm anyone more than a warm hug between two human beings; and that life itself is a greater excitement than cocaine.

Bibliography Bringer K.. Der Mescalinrausch. Berlin: Stringer.

Binswanger L.. Grundformen und Erkenntnis Menschlichen Daseins. Zurich: Niehans.

Binswanger L.. Daseinsanalyse und Psychotherapies. Zurich: Speer.

The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions Binswanger L.. “Daseinsanalyse, Psychiatric, Schizophrenia.” Schweitzer Archive Neurologie Psychiatric 81: 1–8. Binswanger L.. Essene nel Condo. Coma: Astrolabio. Borgia E.. “La tossicomania come esperienza psicoterapeutica.” Psichiatria Gen erase e dell’età evolutiva 3: 127–137. Callieri B.. “L ’esperienza del Lab sessuale nei tossicodipendenti.” Attualità in Psi cologia 8: 5–9. Cargnello D., Callieri B., and Morselli G. E.. Le psicosi sperimentali. Milan: Fel trinelli. Di Pitta G.. Il Condo tossicomane, fenomenologia e psicopatologia. Milan: Franco Angel. Di Pitta G.. Gruppoanalisi dell’esserci: tossicomania e terapia Belle emozioni con devise. Milan: Franco Angel. Gebsattel E. von.. “Zur Psychopathologie der Such.” In Prolegomena Diner Jedi zinschen Anthropologie, pp. 220–227. Berlin: Stringer. Gross G., Huber G., Klosterkoetter J., and Liz M.. BSABS. Bonner Scala für die Beurteilung von Basissymptomen. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Stringer. Heidegger M.. San und Zit. Tubingen: Niemeyer. Husserl E., (1965/2004). Idle per una fenomenologia Aura e per una filosofia fenomeno logic, trans. E. Filippini. Torino: Einaudi. Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. Berlin: Stringer Klosterkoetter J.. Basissymptome und Endphänovene del Schizophrenia. Berlin: Stringer. Minkowski E.. Il tempo vissuto. Fenomenologia e psicopatologia. Torino: Einaudi. Schneider K. (1959/1983). Psicopatologia clinic, trans. B. Callieri. Coma: Mittà Nova. Straps E.. Vom Sine der Sine. Berlin: Stringer. Straps E.. Geschehenis und Erlebnis. Berlin: Stringer. Weizsaecker fifth. von.. Pathosophie. Goettingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. Weizsaecker fifth. von.. Der Gestaltkreis. Theorize der Einheit von Warnhemen und Be ween. Stuttgart: Reorg Theme.

The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions Binswanger L.. “Daseinsanalyse, Psychiatric, Schizophrenia.” Schweitzer Archive Neurologie Psychiatric 81: 1–8. Binswanger L.. Essene nel Condo. Coma: Astrolabio. Borgia E.. “La tossicomania come esperienza psicoterapeutica.” Psichiatria Gen erase e dell’età evolutiva 3: 127–137. Callieri B.. “L ’esperienza del Lab sessuale nei tossicodipendenti.” Attualità in Psi cologia 8: 5–9. Cargnello D., Callieri B., and Morselli G. E.. Le psicosi sperimentali. Milan: Fel trinelli. Di Pitta G.. Il Condo tossicomane, fenomenologia e psicopatologia. Milan: Franco Angel. Di Pitta G.. Gruppoanalisi dell’esserci: tossicomania e terapia Belle emozioni con devise. Milan: Franco Angel. Gebsattel E. von.. “Zur Psychopathologie der Such.” In Prolegomena Diner Jedi zinschen Anthropologie, pp. 220–227. Berlin: Stringer. Gross G., Huber G., Klosterkoetter J., and Liz M.. BSABS. Bonner Scala für die Beurteilung von Basissymptomen. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Stringer. Heidegger M.. San und Zit. Tubingen: Niemeyer. Husserl E., (1965/2004). Idle per una fenomenologia Aura e per una filosofia fenomeno logic, trans. E. Filippini. Torino: Einaudi. Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. Berlin: Stringer Klosterkoetter J.. Basissymptome und Endphänovene del Schizophrenia. Berlin: Stringer. Minkowski E.. Il tempo vissuto. Fenomenologia e psicopatologia. Torino: Einaudi. Schneider K. (1959/1983). Psicopatologia clinic, trans. B. Callieri. Coma: Mittà Nova. Straps E.. Vom Sine der Sine. Berlin: Stringer. Straps E.. Geschehenis und Erlebnis. Berlin: Stringer. Weizsaecker fifth. von.. Pathosophie. Goettingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. Weizsaecker fifth. von.. Der Gestaltkreis. Theorize der Einheit von Warnhemen und Be ween. Stuttgart: Reorg Theme.

The Life-World of Persons with Drug Addictions Butt J.. “Zur Anthropologie der Such.” In Auf dem Wage zu Diner Anthropologist teen Psychiatric, pp. 423–430. Berlin: Stringer.

Notes:

1 ( ) One of the most important ideas of phenomenology, in fact, is the deep union between the subject, other people and the world-of-life. This idea offers an enormous transforming potentiality, which is very useful in a modified setting of group psychotherapy.

2 ( ) Beyond the language of medicine and psychology the essence of psychotic experience, e.g. remains something that cannot be explained, even if it is possible to perceive it. Phe nomenological language in this case must adapt itself to the heart of the lived experience.

G. Di Pitta S. Maria Belle Gracie Hospital, Female Prison, Addiction Center Consultant, Mental Health Department The Life-World of Persons with Autism The Life-World of Persons with Autism Francisco Barale, Divide Broglia, Giulia Nelda De Vidovich, and Stefanie Ucelli di Semi The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Apr 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.104 Abstract and Keywords This chapter describes some characteristics of the world of autistic people. Although these conditions are difficult to classify because of how diverse they are, this chapter re Deals that there are some essential common traits. These common elements concern fun damental aspects of human intentionality, such as the preconditions of social relatedness. The chapter identifies these traits primarily through the studies conducted by Leo Kan ner, who had worked contemporaneously but independently of Hans Asperger during the 1940s. Banner identified some key features that reappeared, in different ways, in category ial definitions of autism: isolation, need for repetition, and the so-called “islets of ability.” Here, the different “autism” are forms of existence that, for various biological reasons, develop from a fragile natural self-evidence of the inter-human world, from an original in tercorporeal and interpersonal weakness. These reveal that sensory-perceptual worlds of some kind do emerge in autistic people, albeit each with its own particular features: autism, therefore, is not an “empty fortress” but rather a “full weakness.” These existed ital worlds involve an original difficulty in harmonizing with others, and are often difficult to grasp or imagine for those who live outside of them.

Keywords: autism, social relatedness, Leo Banner, isolation, repetition, islets of ability, sensory-perceptual worlds # Introduction AUTISM is a generalized developmental disorder that occurs early in life due to an alter Cation in the neurobiological foundations of intercorporeality and intersubjectivity. In autism, the role of biological factors is already evident in early stages of development and has a direct impact on clinical conditions. As a result, interpersonal relationships and ba sic social learning are dramatically impaired. Nonetheless, autistic people often develop— at a very early stage—a peculiar way of experiencing the world sensorially and perceptu ally. In general, autism can be defined as an atypical form of existence in which the biological prerequisites allowing a “normal developing”

The Life-World of Persons with Autism child to harmonize with its caregivers through an “embodied” mimetic attunement and to implicitly and spontaneously absorb meanings, codes, and rules, are gravely compo Vised. In other words, autism can be seen as a form of existence that develops from a fragile or absent “natural self-evidence” with respect to human interactions. Despite these difficulties, however, sensory-perceptual worlds of some kind do emerge in autistic people, albeit each with its own particular features: autism, therefore, is not the “empty fortress” described by Bruno Bettelheim (1967 ), but rather a “full weakness,” so to speak. These existential worlds involve an original difficulty in harmonizing with others, and are often difficult to grasp or imagine for those who live outside of them.

Autistic conditions are extremely heterogeneous in many respects. As a rule, they are not confined to childhood, but last a lifetime, while their existential developments can take many forms. In fact, adult clinical cases provide ample evidence of the variability of the syndromic construct at the echo-pathogenetic level, as well as the plurality of hypothetical nuclear aspects and phenomenal expressions of the disorder. Autism can be associated with mental retardation, while language, if present, is often compo Vised or atypical. When cognitive skills are intact (but they are often irregular and ecu liar) and language is (p. 696) not impaired (at least at the morphostructural level), it is usual to speak of high-functioning autism.

Banner and Asperger Working contemporaneously but independently of each other, Leo Banner and Hans Asperger (1944 ) described an infantile syndrome that they labeled “autistic”—a Bleulerian term until then employed only in the context of schizophrenic disorders. Kan ner identified some key features that reappeared, in different ways, in the subsequent categorical definitions of autism: isolation, need for repetition, and the so-called “islets of ability.”

Autistic isolation is the direct expression of an original social weakness, a difficulty in en aging in spontaneous interaction. As such, it cannot be classified as a secondary phe nomenon, a defensive withdrawal. It is certainly true that, in the course of its develop Bent, autism also leads to a condition of withdrawal and to a “secondary” isolation. From the very start, the difficulty in grasping the meaning of other people’s actions and deli peering them (which, depending on the cases, can be more or less severe), in sustaining mutual relationships and developing spontaneous social skills, are a source of enormous frustration and dismay. Hence there arise feelings of humiliation, powerlessness, social fear, and an increasing defensive withdrawal—in other words, everything that constitutes the secondary dimension of autism. However, those who have extensive familiarity with people suffering from more or less severe forms of autism can often appreciate the level and persistence of their need for communication, their atypical and unhappy sociability, and the amount of joy usually accompanying episodes of successful interaction and emo tonal exchange.

The Life-World of Persons with Autism An entire empirical literature shows that there is no such thing as a biologically grounded lack of social needs in autistic people. In fact, such needs, which are an essential ingredi ent of humanity, can be clearly identified, even though they are hindered by impairments in “primary intersubjectivity” and manifest themselves in atypical, dysfunctional, and often paradoxical ways. A fundamental concept must be intro Educed here: autism cannot be conceived purely in terms of “deficit” nor can it be cap Cured by simple definitions or reduced to all-or-nothing formulas based on the presence or absence of this or that function, be it cognitive, linguistic, or Effective.

Sameness was described by Banner as an intolerance to change and as a particular need to cultivate repetitive interests, sometimes bizarre ones, or to persevere in repetitive mo tor actions. The problem of repetitive behaviors is as complex in autism as in psychic life in general, and intersects in complex ways with the problem of isolation and obsessive compulsiveness. Autistic repetitive behaviors are heterogeneous and manifest themselves at different levels of complexity, stretching from simple stereotyped actions and increase Jingly elaborate routines to forms of withdrawal into often sophisticated areas of interest. Depending on the degree of complexity, such behaviors can serve different functions. In many cases, however, repetition fulfills basic needs of organization, which are particularly pressing in the context of existential worlds deprived of “natural self-evidence” and char acterized, as we shall see, by a fragile predictability. Those who inhabit such worlds (p. 697) describe them as “a confusing interacting mass of events, people, places, sounds and sights.... Set routines, times, particular routes and rituals all help to get order into an unbearably chaotic life”.

Islets of ability are areas of competence of various kinds (visual-spatial, mathematical, musical, etc.): they can be either ordinary skills simply preserved in the context of a gen real disability and “central coherence” weakness, or they can be peculiar (in some cases extraordinary) ones. This particular feature of autism has played an important role in re search both because areas of discontinuous competence express aspects of subjectivity that are important to understand and appreciate, and because its study (especially in the context of a “central coherence” deficit model) has increased our knowledge of the fun toning of the autistic mind.

Drawing from the Bleulerian tradition as well as the German temperament psychopathol ogy, Asperger isolated and described in detail four cases of infantile “autistic psychopa thy” out of a much larger series of cases. Asperger’s descriptions emphasized the socio pathic side of the disorder and focused on the children’s difficulty in empathizing and grasping the emotional world of the other. The descriptions included a sharp differential son between preserved aspects of language (phonology, syntax, semantics) and compo Vised areas (subtle interpersonal communicative skills, prosody, tone, pragmatics, and so on). To be sure, Banner’s and Asperger’s optimistic prognostic pictures were proven wrong by late twentieth-century scientific advancements. However, their groundbreaking observations continued to play a foundational role in understanding autism. The stress they put—through an objectifying, but also participatory and open, observation—on the The Life-World of Persons with Autism existence of preserved and crucial worlds of experience in autistic people can still be a source of inspiration for researchers.

Interlude. Autism and Schizophrenia: The Changing Fortunes of a Controversial Relationship When confronted with such a unique condition of self-isolation, both Banner and Asperg er resorted to the Bleulerian term “autistic” in order to describe it. Considering the op sons available at the time, this was probably the most reasonable scientific term to adopt. This choice, however, came with some powerful implications. We will mention just two of them: 1) the link between autism and schizophrenia (which is in line with a tradition that goes back to the early twentieth century and Ante De Sanctis’s notion of dementia Brae cocissima); 2) the implicit inclusion of autism within the general paradigm of Freudian Sexualtheorie. This paradigm, which dominated psychoanalytic psychopathology for the first half of the twentieth century, viewed psychopathological conditions as forms of fix son/regression to different stages of psychosexual development (the more severe the con Edition, the more primitive the stage). “Autism is nothing but Freud’s autoeroticism with out Eros”: Eugene Bleuler’s explicit definition of autism shows how indebted he was to the idea of explaining psychopathological organizations as fixations/regressions to increasing ly archaic stages of development (in this case, to the so-called “autoerotic” stage). This approach was in line with what Karl Abraham, a pupil of Freud’s, was theorize ing in those years.

(p. 698) The fact that modern theories of autism emerged in the context of a radical crisis of the foundational assumptions behind the very term “autism” may seem paradoxical. The term dissociative identity disorder survive, but both its main implications were abandoned in the last decades of the twentieth century. The “divorce” between autism and schizophrenia will be dis cussed later. The crisis of the paradigm of Sexualtheorie in psychopathology cannot be addressed here.

However, there is another paradox in the history of the relationship between autism and schizophrenia: the last decades of the twentieth century—when research on the found sons of autistic disorder flourished—witnessed a parallel decline of the notion of “autism” in the understanding of schizophrenia. In fact, in the past thirty years, autism has been the most notable absentee in definitions of schizophrenia. The reasons behind this de line, which was somewhat inevitable given the all-encompassing project that dominated psychiatry over the past decades, cannot be discussed here. This project was guided by the neo-Kraepelian idea of focusing on the objective evidence of symptoms in order to pu reify the operational criteria from any subjectivity and preliminary psychopathological hy pothesis. As a result, in the DSM, autism has come to play a marginal role in the catego rization of schizophrenia: it is hesitantly admitted to describe only schizophrenic conj sons characterized by a dramatic “social withdrawal.” This way, one of the glorious no sons of the psychiatry of yesteryear was emptied of most of its epistemic force.

The Life-World of Persons with Autism History, however, can be cunning, and often paradoxically so. In subsequent develop Bents, both conditions (schizophrenia and autism) came to be seen as heterogeneous and rooted in neurodevelopmental impairments. Gradually, research has highlighted signify cant areas of overlap, with respect to genetic contribution to basic vulnerability as well as some developmental aspects. It is likely that research on the workings of the autistic mind and on its correlation with an impairment in primary intersubjectivity will lead to a resumption and improvement of research on schizophrenia and its essential ly “autistic” dimension. This time, however, the terms are reversed: as a construct, autism is no longer an offshoot of theories of schizophrenia nor is it confined to the old concept al framework; rather, it is now capable of generating knowledge useful to illuminate cer Cain aspects of schizophrenic experience.

Some Recent Models for Autism What happened to the Kannerian notion of autism once detached from its psychopath logical matrix? However flawed, this matrix still provided this theoretical construct with some coherence. Deprived of its roots, in the late ’70s “autism” was redefined in behave oral terms as a condition of objective alteration in three operationally definable symptom masc domains: impairment in social interaction, linguistic and non-linguistic abnormal ties in communication, and restricted and stereotyped patterns of behavior and interest. Devoid as it is of psychopathological organizers, this definition immediately appears too inclusive and generic. Epidemiological evidence, however, validate the syndromic ocher Once: there is a statistically significant co-presence of alterations in the three domains. All the later nosographic descriptions, which we cannot discuss here, fol lowed the same pattern of “de-psychopathologization.”

(p. 699) The consequence of this trend was that the construct increasingly lost its spec fixity, especially when compared to the original descriptions of the disorder. A diagnostic hyper-inclusivity predictably followed, due to the many variations in expression and severity of abnormalities detectable in the three too-generically-defined symptomatic do mains. Finally, in recent times, we have witnessed the emergence of the idea of an antis tic “spectrum” in which countless combinations find their proper place: the spectrum comprises the classic Kannerian traits (isolation, obsessive repetition, etc.), but also dif ferment conditions, including the most nuanced ones. It is clear that there is a growing and increasing recognition of the heterogeneity of the disorder.

We cannot, however, follow this story or explore its numerous implications, as it is still largely unfolding. What should be stressed, however, is that this change in perspective had the merit of removing historical prejudices and misunderstandings, thereby fostering the growth of scientific knowledge, in particular as regards the neurobiological underpin Dings of autistic developments. At the same time, however, the definition of autism (or, better, of “autism”) purely in terms of behavioral dysfunctions, the absence of psy chopathological organizers, and the resulting diagnostic hyper-inclusivity, generated at least two main problems: 1) on the side of research, a difficulty in defining more precise The Life-World of Persons with Autism correlations with biological bases; 2) more generally, an increasing neglect of the autistic “worlds” and autistic subjective experience, as if autism was simply a set of maladaptive behaviors waiting to be treated and modified, irrespective of the understanding of such worlds.

Let us now go back to the attempts to understand autistic experience or to identify what is common to the many different forms of autism included in the “spectrum.” This shared element would mean that the term “autism” could still indicate something “typical” and could not be reduced to a sort of “administrative category” within which to group very heterogeneous conditions that only share a generic impairment (with very different degrees of gravity) at some behavioral level. As such, this category would no doubt be destined to dissolve with the growth of knowledge capable of identifying, within it, more specific correlations. During the last two decades of the twentieth century, how ever, some new explanatory models emerged from the ruins of the psychogenic model. From different perspectives, these models have tried to organize and integrate the Blini cal and neurobiological evidence in pursuit of a consistent definition of the multiform functioning of the autistic mind. Among these, it is worth mentioning the Theory of Mind Mechanism; the Effective Contact Deficit Hypothesis; the Weak Central Coherence Theory (Firth 1989; Appè 1994, 1997); the Executive Dysfunction Hypothesis; the Defective Cognitive and Effective Integration Theories; the Imitative Models and the Inactive Mind from Actions to Cogni son model.

None of these models, however, has been able to provide a complete picture of autism. On the other hand, all have produced important empirical evidence and have contributed to a better understanding of autistic worlds, which is essential if we want to provide the right treatment in the appropriate context. The sources of inspiration behind these lines of research were different, as were the notions of “social cognition” they promoted. Their respective difficulties led to the hybridization of models and fields of research. Somehow, however, a common ground was eventually reached. Each from its own perspective, these models have shown that what is at stake in autism—in different ways and degrees—are the species’ innate and pre-programmed preconditions allowing a spontaneous inclusion within the (p. 700) context of primary intersubjectivity. All these lines of research share this view, whatever their model for the development of “social cog nation” might be (“simulationist,” “interactive,” or “theory-of-mind”— Gallagher 2015). In deed, findings coming from such different studies, if observed from a complexity perspex Dive, clearly show that the problem of autism concerns precisely the integration of Batten tonal, cognitive, and Effective factors and the neurofunctional networks underlying such integration.

In what follows, however, we will not discuss these models and their different pathogenic hypotheses about neurodevelopment, but rather, we will explore the experiential world of autistic people by trying to adopt their peculiar “point of view.”

The Life-World of Persons with Autism # Temporality and Sameness In Banner’s observations, obsessive need for repetition and immutability was listed among the key traits: the particular relationship that autism entertains with temporality dissociative identity disorder not escape his attention. Autistic persons feel the constant need to keep internal and external events in check. Indeed, the obsessive dimension of autism is one of the un solved problems of current research (in contrast with non-autistic obsessive disorders, medications very rarely provide relief). Obsessive behaviors, which from the outside ap pear irrational or bizarre, should be understood as attempts to reorganize a space–time continuum that otherwise would seem to slide into chaos. In this sense, bringing things to a halt might limit entropy or loss.

In some cases, routine and restriction of psychomotor intentionality (up to and including stereotype) seem to be conditions for the existence of any experience at all, because they provide it with limits and meaning. The inflexibility of both rituals and areas of interest does represent a diagnostic criterion, but remains one of the least understood aspects of autism even in recent models, despite its importance at the subjective level and as re Bards the patterns of communication and relationship regulated by it. In the context of a fragile balance, crises are often triggered by disruptions of sameness or frustration re salting from the disappointed expectation that things should follow a precise temporal or der. Often, anything that bursts suddenly and unexpectedly into the autistic existence cannot be integrated and generates intense anxiety, which usually manifests itself, esp sally in non-verbal individuals, through so-called “problem behaviors” (which are equally expressive of many other kinds of distress).

The few descriptions “from within” that we possess show that the anancastic dimension of autism cannot be equated with the egodystonic experience typical of obsessive individ Gals. On the contrary, in the absence of alternative strategies of orientation and organza son, and in an interpersonal world deprived of “natural self-evidence” and predictability, anancastic behaviors represent a grid/cage/container perceived as absolutely necessary in the face of a potential experience of chaos, confusion, and fragmentation. In its most dramatic manifestations, such experience is felt as a catastrophic threat to the stability of the borders between the self and the world. In this sense, Temple Grandin’s famous “squeeze machine” can be reinterpreted precisely as a remedy to such feeling.

In autism, this crucial aspect of temporality is connected to the difficulty in developing fluid “forward models” of experience. In normotypical developments, every intentional and motor sequence, whether in the “incoming” or “outgoing” mode, implies (p. 701) a “programming-representation” of the sequence, which is a sort of anticipation of its con sequences. In a way, this “pre-vision” is nothing but a particular instance of the general and mutual co-implication of the three dimensions of temporality: the future, the present, and the past. As such, it also has specific neurophysiological correlates: the anticipatory representations of goal-directed actions and of the embodied self in action (both one’s and the interlocutor’s self actually) are continuously processed in the prefrontal cortex The Life-World of Persons with Autism and, as the sequence unfolds, processed and re-elaborated in the frontal-limbic-cerebellar circuits. These representations not only precede and regulate the execution and/or under standing of goal-directed sequences, but are also reshaped in the course of the se quinces, which in turn they contribute to reshaping. “Anticipatory models” of experience are therefore indispensable for a fluid, dynamic, and open interaction between the self and the world.

Long before these aspects had received neurophysiological confirmation and had been studied primarily in the context of the executive functions deficit model, the great clinician Margaret Mahler, who had no scientific knowledge of the matter, brilliantly grasped this particular aspect of autism: “these children seem to have no intuition of the future,” she wrote; their experience does not seem to be “futureoriented,” as if the consequences of their and other people’s actions could not be predict ed. Therefore, in autism, exchanges between the self and the world follow rigid and un modifiable patterns: immediate responses cannot be inhibited or adjusted according to the circumstances. Selfand context-oriented reflection—namely, the immediate and prereflective apperception of the embodied self in its interaction with the world—cannot maintain their fluidity and openness, and this affects the feeling of agency too.

In autism, the difficulty in integrating large neurological circuits (the “central coherence deficit,” if you will) is reflected in a particular impairment in the experience of time. In fact, the disruption of the flow of intentional movement is connected to what has long been called, without further specification, the deep “dyspraxic core” of autism. This autistic feature is particularly evident and relevant in the world of interper Tonal interactions because of the mentioned difficulty in automatically recognizing, “at tuning” with, and spontaneously adjusting to the feelings of others. In reality, however, this issue concerns the dimension of intentionality as such. On the whole, we are faced here with a crucial question. Any encounter with autistic worlds, but also any attempt to engage in a habilitation program or build “autism friendly” settings, will inevitably collide with a number of obstacles: a restricted form of experience, a low predictability of the world, and a strong need for sameness. All these aspects must be understood and taken into account: obviously, the idea is not to take them as immutable factors, but to open the way to new forms of meaningful, lived experience and communal activities without trig Bering dramatic disruptions of psychological homeostasis.

The Perceptual Articulation of Experience The study of autistic perceptual experience has a long and controversial history. Convert ing empirical findings point to a deficit in the integrated functioning comprising Batten son, perception, apperception, and integration of internal and external sensory stimuli. Attention, eye fixation, and object preference patterns have been thoroughly investigated in (p. 702) populations at risk and in prospective studies, in an attempt to identify early and reliable predictive markers of autism. For example, research has been conducted on the peculiarities of eye fixation patterns, on the lack of preferential eye con The Life-World of Persons with Autism tact, and on the preference for geometric rather than human shapes.

Instances of both operand under-arousal in autism have been carefully described: in over-arousal, disproportionate responses are triggered by seemingly insignificant stimuli and details (one example is hypersensitivity to sounds, noises, and minimal environmental changes); in under-arousal, by contrast, individuals show a certain disinterest for interact Dive and relational stimuli. An unclear distinction between the animate and the inanimate had already emerged in Banner’s seminal descriptions, where patients displayed a ten ency to prefer interaction with inanimate rather than animate objects. Hyper-selective attention, difficulties in the shifting of attentional focus, and sensory modulation dysfunc sons often stand out very clearly and have given rise to interpretative disputes. Are these features “primary” atypias correlated to a nuclear aspect of the disorder, or are they con sequences of secondary adaptations? Can they be defined as a global deficit or are they limited to certain types of stimuli and specific forms of attention?

Clinical and neurophysiological findings are in this sense contradictory (O’Riordan and Plaited 2001;, but seem to point to a transmodal problem as regards sensory domains, a problem correlated to atypical patterns of neocortical connectivity and afferent processing—a “central coherence” deficit, if you will—often characterized by local hyperactivity and long distance hypoconnectivity. In any case, the peculiarity of per ceptual experience has a strong impact on the organization of autistic existential worlds. Here as well it seems that a dynamic element is missing, namely a form of attention that, in the interaction with the animate and inanimate world, is capable both of focusing on ir relevant aspects of experience and effortlessly ignoring them, in a constant process of re organization. Autistic experience seems almost immune to distraction and hardly sens Dive to other people’s views. As a result, one can sometimes encounter a startling obser National and discriminating capacity, to the point where even minor details and differ Fences are registered. Absolute pitch and the ability to piece together picture-less, white jigsaw puzzles are among the peculiarities of autistic perceptual organization.

In the context of such an idiosyncratic experience of the world, stress has been put on the impairment in social perception and especially on joint attention deficits. “Porto-declarative” gestures generally develop in the first half of the second year of life: through them, the child controls and directs the attention of the interlocutor to an object of joint attention. These gestures are therefore essential for the construction of a shared framework of meaning. Their absence is one of the best-known indicators of potential risk of developing autism. Equally idiosyncratic, in autism, is the so-called lived distance: “Be Bond the physical and geometrical distance existing between me and all things”—Mer lo-Monty has written—“a lived distance links me to things that count and exist for me, and links them to each other. At each moment, this distance measures the ‘scope’ of my life. Sometimes between me and events there is a certain leeway (Spielraum) that pre serves my freedom without the events ceasing to touch me. Sometimes, however, the lived distance is at once too short and too wide: the majority of events cease to count for The Life-World of Persons with Autism me, whereas the nearest ones consume me. They envelop me like the night, and they rob me of individuality and freedom” ( Merleau-Monty 1945/2013: 299).

(p. 703) Affectivity and Reciprocity Affectivity is historically one of the most misunderstood aspects of autism: at first, it was confined to psychogenic theories of cold parenting and, later on, to variations on the theme of autism as “lack of emotions.” In fact, autistic subjects do establish emotional ties with the external world and sometimes express extreme feelings in response to emo tonal and relational atmospheres. Autistic affectivity appears to oscillate constantly be tween the poles of the excessive and the defective, the “too much” and the “too little.” Im paired functionality of natural mechanisms of regulation, modulation, communication, and mimic recognition exposes autistic people to often chaotic and extreme emotional ex periences, which are dealt with by relying on private strategies of organization.

Clara C. Park, writing about her daughter, has left us an eloquent description of these enigmatic extremes of ecstasy and despair, which have forced her and her husband to continually put things in doubt and question both the events and the network of affect Dive meanings in which they were immersed. Some things catch the attention of autistic people because of their novelty, others because they are a confirmation of a previous ex pectation or state of anguish. To a certain extent, this is the case for everyone, but in autistic people this dynamic unfolds through associations and private emotional codes that cannot be grasped from the outside. In the words of Clara Park: “But what good dissociative identity disorder it do to know that a lighted window had disrupted the darkness of the building across the street?”. Affections and emotions are there, but the idiom is private. To ap roach an autistic world requires a patient deciphering and communal creation of alter native styles of expression.

The apparent refusal to communicate (through echolalia, prolonged silence, or problem behaviors) has its own semantics and points to emotional worlds difficult to penetrate but nonetheless present. In her books, essays, and conversations with Oliver Sacks, Temple Grandin has stressed that exchanges of affection appear to her as incomprehensible and regulated by mysterious subtleties: for her, to explore interpersonal worlds is equivalent to deciphering structures, codes, and mysterious life forms, as “an anthropologist on Mars” would do. However, there are also forms of life and experience that cannot be grasped and learned from the outside, as it happens with a for Sign language. They are embedded in us from birth and stem from an original experien ital core and “intercorporeal” sharing. It is precisely within this core that something, in autistic developments, seems to have gone wrong. Affectivity, language, and inter-human communication somehow form a shadowy area where different concepts overlap and get mixed up and where our understanding of autism “from the outside” is faced with its apo Bias and challenges.

The Life-World of Persons with Autism The “Effective contact” deficit could be reconsidered in terms of “original reciprocity”: from the start, communication exchanges are characterized, on the one side, by res probity and, on the other, by some tension and a resulting pleasure in mutual recognition. Since the ’70s, studies have shown impaired recognition of facial expressions of emotion al states in autistic individuals: it was on the basis of such evidence that the original af fictive deficit model of autism was elaborated. Indeed, something seems not to be work ing at the level of primary intersubjectivity. There appears to be no given background for the emergence of an interpersonal self within a world of shared meanings. What is lack ing is an (p. 704) “initially quite theoretical, implicit, and prereflexive self-evidence, an automatically-given background of meaning which works as an intersubjective matrix pro Aiding meaning and a sense of reciprocity. In non-autistic individuals, this self-evidence gradually expands and allows them to navigate their way almost automatically in the in ter-human world as in their natural environment, an environment which they have some how pre-comprehended from the beginning” ( Barale and Ucelli 2006b: 108–109).

Imitation plays a key role in these processes: primary imitation gradually gives way to in creasingly complex and less “echo-like” imitative skills. It is no coincidence that imitation is a traditional topic of research in autism. A few years after Banner’s studies, Edward Ritvo was the first to give a clinical description of imitation deficits in autistic children. Later on, Rogers and Pennington systematically studied these deficits and, drawing from Daniel Stern’s conceptualizations, speculated that an original imitative deficit could be hampering self–other mapping processes. Early imitative processes, which are spontaneous and pre-representational, are also fundamental for de velopment of Effective attunement as described by Stern and for “intercorporeal dia Rogue” with the caregivers. Peter Robson has done extensive research in this area. A Canadian prospective study of a population of children at genetic risk has shown that deficits in imitation precede the emergence of clear autistic symptoms (Zwaigenbaum 2005. These findings (confirmed by neuroimaging studies) have fostered methods of in tervention focused on supporting embryonic capacities for imitative interaction, which is considered the true driving force behind the development of social skills.

Imitation plays a key role in these processes: primary imitation gradually gives way to in creasingly complex and less “echo-like” imitative skills. It is no coincidence that imitation is a traditional topic of research in autism. A few years after Banner’s studies, Edward Ritvo was the first to give a clinical description of imitation deficits in autistic children. Later on, Rogers and Pennington systematically studied these deficits and, drawing from Daniel Stern’s conceptualizations, speculated that an original imitative deficit could be hampering self–other mapping processes. Early imitative processes, which are spontaneous and pre-representational, are also fundamental for de velopment of Effective attunement as described by Stern and for “intercorporeal dia Rogue” with the caregivers. Peter Robson has done extensive research in this area. A Canadian prospective study of a population of children at genetic risk has shown that deficits in imitation precede the emergence of clear autistic symptoms (Zwaigenbaum 2005. These findings (confirmed by neuroimaging studies) have fostered methods of in tervention focused on supporting embryonic capacities for imitative interaction, which is considered the true driving force behind the development of social skills.

In reality, this issue is both complex and controversial. However, it is reasonable to sup pose that some kind of imitative deficit might deprive autistic children of basic inform son about other people’s worlds and possible connections between internal states and be Saviors. Imitation implies feeling what the other feels. This, in turn, is the prerequisite for the development of a capacity to form an internal representation of that feeling, namely of a meta-representational capacity. The plurality of mimetic desires typical of human be Dings is in turn closely associated with the problem of identification and social recognition. The complexity of simulation and imitation processes is reflected on bonding functions and Effective relationships between the self and the other. Alexander Kojève (1947 ) re minded us that mimesis—namely a desire for the other’s desire—is the form of reciprocity on which social recognition is grounded. In the last two decades, neuroscience of mirror systems has provided empirical confirmation of these insights, opening the way for re The Life-World of Persons with Autism search on alterations in embodied simulation across the autistic spectrum.

Intentionality and Intercorporeality “I cannot reach my baby”: these were the words of the mother of one of the autistic Phil Wren observed by Banner. “He walks as if he is in a shadow,” Banner suggestively re marked, somehow echoing the mother’s dismay at the emotional detachment of her enig masc son. Seemingly self-evident aspects of experience can appear, in fact, as mute and enshrouded in mystery. It is interesting to note that the difficulty in per caving and representing the other’s intentionality is bidirectional: it affects both those who try to approach the world of an autistic person and the autistic person herself.

(p. 705) From whatever scientific perspective we decide to address the problem—be it through the lenses of the Effective contact deficit hypothesis, the empathy deficit, the ex ecutive functions deficit, or the central coherence deficit—it is clear that this problem concerns the core foundations of human intentionality: here lie the processes allowing one to perceive (or, better, “to feel,” thanks to the body as a “tacit cogito,” as Merleau- Monty put it) both one’s and other people’s actions as “goal-oriented” and as rooted in a common ground, and to modulate them accordingly. This leads to the development of a sense of self as an “intentional agent” actively immersed in a set of goal-oriented and identifiable exchanges. The sense of “Fineness” of experience, objects, and desires be comes altered in a universe where the boundaries between the self and the other, the ac cidental and the intentional, the physical and the mental, tend to blur. In this sense, even the frequent misuse of pronouns (the lack of “I” and the use of the third person to refer to oneself) discloses the complex constellations of meaning typical of autistic subjectivity and agency.

Intercorporeality comes well before mind reading and the attribution of mental states: it is a direct, pre-representational form of understanding of the other, rooted in the body and in the activation of specific neural systems through “intentional at tenement.” Deficits in psychomotor coordination and fluency (and therefore, to varying degrees, in intercorporeality) had already been described in the first observations of autistic children, especially by Asperger. Often, the body appears as if hindered by an ob stale and trapped in a postural clumsiness or afflicted by an almost imperceptible dipso Dance. These peculiar body-states correlate in a complex way with difficulties in interior portal attunement, which is the pre-verbal foundation of communication between people. These aspects contributed to the development of the idea of the “dyspraxic core” of autism.

Recent findings have confirmed such difficulties in intercorporeal organization in individ Gals with autism, highlighting important aspects and neurophysiological mechanisms. In typical developments, intentional sequences “incarnate” from the very start in their own psychomotor organization and kinematics both their “what” (i.e. the action itself) and their “why” (i.e. the intention underlying the action). This applies both to “incoming”

The Life-World of Persons with Autism processes (i.e. understanding the meaning of other people’s sequences), and “outgoing” ones (i.e. sequence execution). In other words, the same motor sequence—for example, reaching out to grasp a glass of water—can have quite different “whys”: drinking, moving the glass, throwing water on the interlocutor, and so on. In normotypical developments, the “what” and the “why” are inherently inscribed from the beginning in the kinematic or ganization of the intentional sequence, which is different in the three cases mentioned above. Specific mirror systems apparently ensure the gestalt, immediate, and pre-reflex Dive recognition of the “embodied meaning” of intentional sequences. From the very be ginning, conversely, in autistic developments there is a difficulty in inscribing both the “what” and the “why” in the understanding and execution of intentional sequences. In the case of high-functioning autism, the “what” and “why” of intentional sequences are rather “superimposed” from the outside: they do not intrinsically belong to the psychomotor and immediate organization of sequences, which, however, lack such intrinsic coherence any way. These recent findings are extremely relevant from a practical point of view, especial ly when integrated in the modalities with which autistic patients are approached and in terventions and habilitation programs are initiated. However, as it happens with other features of autism, even this one is not entirely “static” or “global.” The ability to (p. 706) incarnate and recognize the “why” in intentional sequences is not always absent, nor is it immutable: in fact, contexts of intense and shared practical activity may allow its Amer Fence.

Conclusion We have described some characteristics of the world of autistic people, which suggest, despite the extraordinary diversity of conditions covered by this term, some essential common traits. These common elements concern fundamental aspects of human intel tonality, such as the preconditions of social relatedness. The different “autism” are forms of existence that, for various biological reasons, develop from a fragile natural selfevidence of the inter-human world, from an original intercorporeal and interpersonal weakness. However, worlds of some kind do emerge from such conditions, with peculiar ties that we must try to understand, if we want to relate to them and arrange appropriate contexts and interventions.

In conclusion, it is worth emphasizing a point once again: autism is not conceivable pure ly in terms of “deficit.” None of its aspects can be explained away through clear-cut define itions or “all-or-nothing” formulas on the basis of the presence or absence of this or that function, be it cognitive, linguistic, or Effective. As we have seen, for example, the development of imitative capacities is not entirely absent, but, rather, atypical. A similar consideration applies to the recognition and communication of emo sons. There are indeed numerous signs of atypical sociability and “need for sociability” (Knobloch and Pasamanick 1975;); the recognition of the “why” of intentional sequences is not statically absent, but can be stimulated by intense and shared practical activity.

The Life-World of Persons with Autism To think of autistic worlds as instantiations of simple “deficits” is no less serious a mis take than to embrace the old psychogenic theory, according to which autism was simply a “consequence” of cold parenting. The various models we have described were developed in the psychological laboratory. However, it has long been noted that there is a discrepant cy between what is seen in the laboratory and what is observable in ecological contexts. Therefore, some have emphasized the necessity to expand both observations and “Batu realistic” interventions beyond the confines of the laboratory. Artificial strategies adopted by high-functioning subjects in the laboratory, for example, do not match “spontaneous” capacities. Even more interestingly, in “natural” and “autism friendly” contexts—where the peculiar needs of autistic people are accommodated—one can often observe not only “islets” of ability, but also surprising oscillations in the same abilities and disabilities, so that unsuspected capacities sometimes emerge. As Uta Firth remarked, in autism a deficit is never either static or global. Therefore, we must get used to the idea that “autism” are not pure deficits, but atypical developments or “full weaknesses” where all the ingredients of humanity are somehow present, although in atypical and dys functional combinations. In these unique existential worlds, where nothing is purely de fictive, the incapacity to perceive and experience the other is never total or irrevocable.

Translated from the Italian by Martin Ross Mons. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Francisco Barale Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia Divide Broglia Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia Giulia Nelda De Vidovich Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia Stefanie Ucelli di Semi Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Den sty Giovanni Castellini and Waldo Wicca The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Sep 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.107 Abstract and Keywords This chapter describes the lived word of persons with eating disorders. Moving from the phenomenological perspective, it focuses on the role of the awareness and experience of one’s own body as the original anchors of the developing sense of self. It also describes a new instrument for assessment of eating disorders, based on this approach. Finally, it considers the centrality of language for body definition and its relationship with the process of identity construction. From this point of view, eating disorders can be consed red as examples of psychopathology of postmodernity, in which linguistic changes and innovations of language definitions mirror the fluidity of cultural transformations and their impact on the body. Therefore, to understand the subjective world of persons with eating disorders, the phenomenological approach takes into account both the way per sons speak about their body as well as the way persons perceive their own body.

Keywords: Feeding and eating disorders, body image, self-identity, binge eating, compensatory behaviors, emo tonal eating # Eating Disorders: What is Behind Pathological # Behaviors?

EATING disorders (eating disorders) are defined as psychiatric syndromes, characterized by a persist tent disturbance of eating or eating-related behaviors, that result in the altered consume son or absorption of food and that significantly impair physical health or psychosocial functioning. According to a behavioral level of assessment, the fifth edition of the Dag Gnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) divides the category of Feed ing and Eating Disorders into pica, rumination disorder, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder. However, overcoming this position, the phenomenological per spective takes into account the subjective perception of one’s own body and behaviors, and the system of significance and values related to them. Furthermore, several authors Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity support a dimensional rather than categorical approach, which appears to be more ocher ent to this perspective, and allows for the description of a more complex pattern of eating disorder symptomatology, which is shared by all the main diagnoses. Finally, the temporal instability of the DSM diagnoses, and the substantial crossover between them, support adopting dimensional models.

Indeed, diagnostic categories seem to differ between them, only in terms of state-deepen dent symptoms, such as weight loss (anorexia nervosa vs bulimia nervosa), purging be Saviors (bulimia nervosa vs binge eating disorders) binge eating (differentiating subtypes of anorexia nervosa). However, from a phenomenological perspective it is important to understand why patients with eating disorders decided to change their eating habits, why their weight became the core of their entire life, and why available psychological treatments often reduce the pathological behaviors but scarcely challenge the core psychopathology.

According to these observations, there is general agreement in considering behavioral anomalies—which are required for DSM diagnosis—as secondary epiphenomena to a more (p. 711) profound psychopathological core, defined by excessive concerns about body shape and weight. In particular, patients with eating disorders overvalue their body shape and weight. Furthermore, the body image disturbance has been associated with a more profound disturbance consisting in disorders of the way per sons experience their own body and shape their personal identity. In other words, whereas most people evaluate and define themselves on the basis of the way they perceive their performance in various domains, patients with eating disorders judge their self-worth largely, or even exclusively, in terms of their shape and weight and their ability to control these aspects of their body.

The psychopathological core, rather than behavioral abnormalities, plays a crucial role in the onset and persistence of these disorders. Indeed, it has been associated with different responses to psychological treatment in several reports, and some authors have pointed out that the threshold to define the full recovery process might be body shame, appear Once schemes, and thin-ideal internalization. Therefore, these may be fruitful targets of intervention among those on a recovery trajectory.

Moreover, the lived world of people with eating disorders can include a distorted perception of space and time. Several behaviors and cognitive distortions can be derived from a basic sense of spatial metamorphosis that is deeply associated with the disorder of corporeality. In the same way, the perception of time in eating disorder patients appears to be connected with the temporal discontinuity of the representation of one’s own body, and the need for pre dictability of one’s own life, which is achieved/failed according to control of eating and weight.

In line with this perspective, a comprehensive assessment of persons with eating disorders should in Elude: the way of perceiving one’s own body and lived corporeality, the significance of the illness and the body in inter-subjective interactions, as well as the personal identity define Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity ition, spatial perception, and the way of experiencing time associated with several eating disorder fea Cures (such as binge eating or weight control).

Eating Disorders as Disturbance of Self-identi ty According to several psychological theories, persons with eating disorders are characterized by a dys functional system for evaluating self-worth. Whereas most people evaluate and define themselves on the basis of a variety of domains of life (e.g. the quality of their relation ships, work, parenting, sporting ability, etc.), people with eating disorders judge themselves largely, or even exclusively, in terms of their body shape as well as their eating habits, and their ability to control weight.

From a psychodynamic perspective, Tilde Brute suggested that the dissatisfaction with the body image that characterizes persons with eating disorders reflects a maladaptive “search for selfhood and a self-respecting identity.” Stern emphasizes that feeding is a vital activity for the construction of the self, as it serves as a framing environment and allows face-to-face contact with the caregiver via the phenomenon of “Effective attunement,” an essential step toward the development of a narrative self and a sense of identity. Also, within the cognitive model, self-concept is defined as a set of knowledge structures about the self that originate from the cognitive products of the person’s interaction with the so Dial world. These (p. 712) aspects are important for the development of self-schemes that shape the individual’s social interactions.

From a cognitive point of view, the self-concept is defined as a set of knowledge strum Cures about the self that originates from the cognitive products of the person’s interaction with the social world. These aspects are important for development of self-schemes that shape the individual’s social interactions. The literature in this field has provided two main constructs to pertaining one’s own identity, which have been proposed as maintaining factors of eating disorders: severe clinical perfectionism and core low self-esteem. Clinical perfectionism is a system for self-evaluation in which self-worth is judged largely on the basis of striving to achieve demanding goals and success at meet ing them. Perfectionism is well-known to be frequently observed in patients with eating disorder. In this case, “perfectionism” is not the same as “obsessionality,” at least in phenomenological terms. The former is a personality trait, that is present in obsessive-compulsive personality as well in other mental disorders (e.g. eating disorders), whereas the world of the obsessive largely differs from the one of per sons affected by eating disorders. There is often an interaction between the two forms of psychopathology with the patient’s perfectionist standards being applied to the attempts to control eating, shape, and weight, as well as other aspects of life (e.g. performance at work or sport). Regarding the core of low self-esteem, most patients with eating disorders have an un conditional and pervasive negative view of themselves that is seen as part of their perm Bent identity. These patients show particularly pronounced negative cognitive processing biases, coupled with over-generalization, with the result that any perceived “failure” is in Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity terpreted as confirmation that they are failures as people thereby reaffirming their over all negative view of themselves. Moreover, in a psychodynamic per spective, impairments in overall identity development and the failure to establish multiple and diverse domains of self-definition have been considered the core pathoplastic mesa ism of eating disorders.

Stanghellini et al. provided a phenomenological interpretation of the core psy chopathology of eating disorders based on a disturbance of self-identity. According to this hypothesis, in persons with eating disorders the disturbance of the experience of one’s own body is interconnect ed with the process of shaping their personal identity. The cenesthetic apprehension of one’s own body is the more primitive and basic form of self-awareness, and patients with eating disorders often report—with different extents of insight—difficulties in perceiving their emo sons and that they do not “feel” themselves. Indeed, feeling oneself is a ba sic requirement to achieve an identity and a stable sense of one’s self. Therefore, for persons prone to symptomatology of eating disorders, the identity is no longer a real psychic structure that persists beyond the flow of time and circumstances. The exp rience of not feeling one’s own body and emotions involves the whole sense of identity. This causes us to deprive ourselves of our existence as a being-for-itself and instead learn to falsely self-identify as a being-in-itself. Therefore, there is the need to re sort to one’s own body weight as a viable source of definition of the self, as patients often report: “Sometimes, the emotions I feel are extraneous to me and scare me”; “I see my self out of focus, I don’t feel myself.” From an empirical point of view, the relationships between abnormal eating behavior and self-construct or identity in eating disorders has already been investigated (Orbø et al. 2006). For example, Nordbø documented that anorexic persons may explain their behavior as a tool for achieving a new identity Skarderud (2007 showed that for some persons with eating disorder, changing one’s body is a means of changing one’s identity. They want to change, and changing one’s body serves as (p. 713) both a concrete and a symbolic tool for such ambitions. Thus, shaping oneself is a “concretised metaphor”, establishing equivalence between a psychic reality (identity) and a physical one (one’s body shape). As suggested by Surgenor et al., looking into the different ways persons with eating disorder construe their own self, especially in Bela son to their disorder and therapy, has strategic implications for the therapeutic endeavor.

The Questionnaire IDEA (IDentity and EAting # Disorders): an Instrument to Measure Visor # Hers of Self-identity Recently, based on a phenomenological perspective, a questionnaire named IDEA (IDenti ty and EAting disorders) has been used to assess and validate abnormalities in lived cor poreality and personal identity. The questionnaire was Bevel oped based on the following conceptual areas: feeling oneself through the gaze of the oth er, defining oneself through the evaluation of the other, feeling oneself through objective measures, feeling extraneous from one’s own body, feeling oneself through starvation, Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity defining one’s identity through one’s own body, feeling oneself through physical activity and fatigue. Theoretically, the questionnaire assumed that most pathological eating be Saviors and features are a consequence of the severity of abnormal bodily experiences and an identity disorder. The authors demonstrated that the questionnaire was able to identify relevant psychopathological phenomena that are closely related to the specific anomalies of eating disorder patients measured with commonly-adopted psychometric instruments. In particular, the subscales showed a different pattern of association with the features of eating disorders. Feeling oneself through the gaze of the other and defining oneself through the val Cation of the other was associated with overvalued thoughts regarding body shape. A measure of alienation from one’s own body and emotions, and feeling extraneous from one’s own body, significantly correlated with concerns about weight and body shape. Fi ally, feeling oneself through objective measures and feeling oneself through starvation were associated with overvalued thoughts regarding weight and eating concerns and with dietary restriction, respectively. In line with these results, some characteristic eating disorder behave Tors, such as starvation and the fixated checking of objective measures, might be inter prated as an alternative coping strategy aimed at feeling oneself for those patients who are unable to feel themselves cenesthetically. These results were confirmed for patients reporting anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder. Moreover, it was also applied beyond the boundaries of the DSM diagnostic cat egories, and abnormal bodily experiences were observed not just for “over-threshold” eating disorder patients. First of all, it was tested in a large population of university students who dissociative identity disorder not suffer from eating disorders. IDEA appeared to be able to identify vulnera Ability in subjects without full-blown eating disorders but with abnormal eating patterns. Moreover, the questionnaire provides a numerical threshold to discriminate clinical vs non-clinical pop Cations. Indeed, in people who develop clinically relevant eating disorders, extraneousness from one’s own body is a phenomenon that is significantly more manifest and penetrant than in peo ple who display over-threshold, but non full-blown abnormal eating patterns. This could represent the first step (p. 714) to demonstrate that IDEA is able to identify candidate ex periential intermediate phenotype that express a gradient of vulnerability from healthy to clinical persons with eating disorders. Finally, the questionnaire was applied to morbidly obese pa taints, which is a population at high risk of developing eating disorder behaviors. The vulnerability to eating disorder behaviors such as binge eating appeared to be associated with abnormal bodily experiences in a dimensional pattern. In this study, authors also found that abnormal bodily experiences measured by IDEA represented the psychological underpinning of the relationship between binge eating behaviors and impulsivity. A Jedi Cation model clarified that not impulsivity in itself, but the presence of impulsivity in per sons affected by abnormal bodily experiences, may lead to eating disorder psychopathology and ab normal eating behaviors. Authors concluded that the disturbance in the lived corporeality may represent the core vulnerability trait underlying the association between personality traits such as impulsivity and the development of eating disorders features.

Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity defining one’s identity through one’s own body, feeling oneself through physical activity and fatigue. Theoretically, the questionnaire assumed that most pathological eating be Saviors and features are a consequence of the severity of abnormal bodily experiences and an identity disorder. The authors demonstrated that the questionnaire was able to identify relevant psychopathological phenomena that are closely related to the specific anomalies of eating disorder patients measured with commonly-adopted psychometric instruments. In particular, the subscales showed a different pattern of association with the features of eating disorders. Feeling oneself through the gaze of the other and defining oneself through the val Cation of the other was associated with overvalued thoughts regarding body shape. A measure of alienation from one’s own body and emotions, and feeling extraneous from one’s own body, significantly correlated with concerns about weight and body shape. Fi ally, feeling oneself through objective measures and feeling oneself through starvation were associated with overvalued thoughts regarding weight and eating concerns and with dietary restriction, respectively. In line with these results, some characteristic eating disorder behave Tors, such as starvation and the fixated checking of objective measures, might be inter prated as an alternative coping strategy aimed at feeling oneself for those patients who are unable to feel themselves cenesthetically. These results were confirmed for patients reporting anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder. Moreover, it was also applied beyond the boundaries of the DSM diagnostic cat egories, and abnormal bodily experiences were observed not just for “over-threshold” eating disorder patients. First of all, it was tested in a large population of university students who dissociative identity disorder not suffer from eating disorders. IDEA appeared to be able to identify vulnera Ability in subjects without full-blown eating disorders but with abnormal eating patterns. Moreover, the questionnaire provides a numerical threshold to discriminate clinical vs non-clinical pop Cations. Indeed, in people who develop clinically relevant eating disorders, extraneousness from one’s own body is a phenomenon that is significantly more manifest and penetrant than in peo ple who display over-threshold, but non full-blown abnormal eating patterns. This could represent the first step (p. 714) to demonstrate that IDEA is able to identify candidate ex periential intermediate phenotype that express a gradient of vulnerability from healthy to clinical persons with eating disorders. Finally, the questionnaire was applied to morbidly obese pa taints, which is a population at high risk of developing eating disorder behaviors. The vulnerability to eating disorder behaviors such as binge eating appeared to be associated with abnormal bodily experiences in a dimensional pattern. In this study, authors also found that abnormal bodily experiences measured by IDEA represented the psychological underpinning of the relationship between binge eating behaviors and impulsivity. A Jedi Cation model clarified that not impulsivity in itself, but the presence of impulsivity in per sons affected by abnormal bodily experiences, may lead to eating disorder psychopathology and ab normal eating behaviors. Authors concluded that the disturbance in the lived corporeality may represent the core vulnerability trait underlying the association between personality traits such as impulsivity and the development of eating disorders features.

Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity # The Lived Body in Persons with Eating Visor # Hers The process of personal identity development has been considered as deeply intercom nested with lived corporeality, and with representation of one’s own body. Indeed, accord ing to a neurobiological perspective, the experience of the body is the original anchor of our developing sense of the self. The mind continues to mature until it can represent and reflect upon its own contents. The self becomes abstracted from the body and it is intellectualized as the self-conscious mind. However, the felt self and its body background continue to frame whatever is the current focus of attention. During the developmental period, every person structures his or her own primitive form of self-den sty around the progressive building and discovering of the body image. Although there is no definite consensus on the concept of body image, it has become clear that the body image is neither completely innate nor completely constructed out of exp rience and learning. Body image is considered as a multidimensional pattern, which in Eludes cognitive and Effective components (concerns and feelings about the body), per caption (estimation of body size), and behaviors related to the perception of one’s own body. It has been defined as the picture of the body that is formed in the mind or “a system of perceptions, attitudes and beliefs pertaining to one’s body”. For a more accurate psychopathological definition, it is important to distinguish between different dimensions of embodiment, such as body schema, body image and lived body, although no consensus concerning terminology has yet emerged. The concept of body image should be clearly differential ed from body schema, which is “a system of sensory-motor capacities that function with out awareness or the necessity of perceptual monitoring”. According to Head (1926 ), the body schema is a model/representation of one’s own body that consti Lutes a standard along which postures and body movements are judged. This represent son can be considered the result of comparisons and integration at the cortical level of past sensory experiences (postural, tactile, visual, kinesthetic, and vestibular) with cur rent sensations. This gives rise to an almost completely unconscious “plastic” reference model that makes it possible to move easily in space and to recognize the parts of one’s own body in all situations.

(p. 715) Several studies have demonstrated the importance of concerns related to the body (e.g. shape, weight) in determining different courses of eating disorders, in terms of response to treatment and long-term outcome. Patients with eating disorders typically overvalue their body shape and weight; body image disturbances may be the key to distinguish between partially and fully recovered individuals and a healthier relationship with one’s body may be the final hurdle in recovery. In particular, it has been suggested that body image distortion—defined as “a dis turbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced” —represents a specific trait of eating disorders, which allows distinguishing Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity between affected eating disorder patients and normal subjects, across a continuum of severity of sev real psychopathological domains.

The relationship between body image and identity has been postulated by Allamani and Allegranzi (1990 ) who refer to body image as “a complex psychological organization which develops through the bodily experience of an individual and affects both the schema of behavior and a fundamental nucleus of self-image.”

In recent studies, which advance the phenomenological perspective mentioned above, Stanghellini et al. (2012, 2015 ) demonstrate that the core psychopathology in eating disorders is re Bated to a dimension of embodiment named “lived-body-for-others.” According to these findings, persons with eating disorders experience the body first and foremost as an object being looked at by another, rather than cenesthetically or from a first-person perspective. This is also related with a feeling of extraneousness from their own body, and with a constant attempt to define themselves through pathological behaviors such as starvation or fixated checking of objective measures. Such behaviors may operate as coping strategies aimed at being able to experience the self in some way for those who are unable to feel them selves cenesthetically.

This position draws from the background of Sartre’s philosophy, which defines the process of self-structuration across life by drawing on the progressive consciousness of one’s own lived corporeality. From a phenomenological perspective, there is a distinction between lived body ( Lab ) and physical body ( Köper ), or body-subject and body-object. The first is the body experienced from within, my own direct experience of my body in the first-person perspective, myself as a spatiotemporal embodied agent in the world; the sec ond is the body thematically investigated from without, from a third-person perspective, for example as viewed by natural sciences such as anatomy and physiology (Husserl 1912–1915; Merleau-Monty 1996 ). The body can be apprehended in the first-person per spective as the body-I-am. This is the cenesthetic apprehension of one’s own body, the primitive experience of oneself, the basic form of self-awareness, or the direct, unmediat ed experience of one’s own “facticity,” including oneself as “this” body, its form, height, weight, color, as well as one’s past and what is actually happening. First and foremost, we always have an implicit acquaintance with our own body from the first-person perspex Dive. The lived body turns into a physical, objective body whenever we become aware of it in a disturbing way. Whenever our movement is somehow impeded or disrupted, then the lived body is thrown back on itself, materialized or “corporealized.” It becomes an object for me. Having been a living bodily being before, I now realize that I have a material (im Ceding, clumsy, vulnerable, finite, etc.) body. In addition to these two di Pensions of corporeality, Sartre emphasized that one can apprehend one’s own body also from another vantage point, as the body when it is looked at by another person. When I become aware that I or, better, my body, is looked at by another person, I realize it can be an object for that person. Sartre calls this the “lived-body-for-others.” “With the appear Once of the Other’s look,” writes Sartre, “I experience the revelation of my being-as-ob Sect.” The (p. 716) result is a feeling of “having my being outside... [the feeling] of being an object”. Thus, one’s identity becomes reified by the gaze of the other, Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity and reduced to the external appearance of one’s own body. The phenomenological con Dept of lived body must also be differentiated from the body image, as the immediate ex perience of one’s body (the layer of kinesthetic sensations), and not a representation of it (Husserl 1912–1915; Merleau-Monty 1996; Stanghellini 2012). The lived body is my own direct experience of my body from a first-person perspective, of myself as a spatiotempo ral embodied agent in the world.

Anomalies with embodiment have already been posited as central domains of several mental disorders, including schizophrenia manic-depressive disorders, and body dysmorphic disorder. Abnormal attitudes toward one’s own corporeality, and difficulties in the definition of one’s own identity, have been proposed as the core features of these disorders. In subjects with a proneness to patio logical eating behaviors, the body is no longer the essential experience of being-in-theworld, but a prison which represents the only way to define themselves.

The body becomes the means to get in touch with their own emotions. Accordingly, these are sentences often reported by eating disorder patients: “Having my weight under control makes me feel in control of my emotional states”; “If my measurements remain the same over time I feel that I am myself, if not I feel I am getting lost.”

From a neurobiological perspective, brain activation in response to the view of one’s own body involves extensive circuitry including dorsolateral prefrontal, supplementary motor, insular, inferior parietal (representation of one’s own body schema), fusiform (human face recognition process), occipitotemporal (the so-called “extrastriate body area”) and Xingu late regions. Moreover, body image distortion has been associated with a specific active son pattern that includes the inferior parietal Globule and the dorsolateral prefrontal cor tex (DLPFC). The DLPFC represents an intriguing neurobiological correlate for psychopathological domains, given the functions associated with this brain region. It is part of corticostriatal loops, which contribute not only to executive functions but also to the regulation of emotional impulses mediated by limbic and paralimbic strum Cures by means of enhancing the tendency of individuals to sup press aversive emotional states. Furthermore, it may represent the biological underpinning of the link between body image and identity disturbance in eating disorders. Indeed, the DLPFC has long been considered a key component of a network subserving awareness of self and metacognitive evaluation of the self. There fore, in eating disorders specific activation of DLPFC in response to body image distortion tasks could suggest that the oversize body stimuli can be considered highly relevant for self-evalua son.

The Other Clinicians often report that eating disorder patients define themselves through the gaze of other per sons: “For me it’s very important to see myself through the eyes of the others”; “The way I feel depends on the way I feel looked at by the others”; “Sometimes I Localize myself through the gaze of the others.” As previously stated, a specific alteration of lived compo Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity reality can be detected in patients with eating disorders, and represents the psychopathological di Pension underpinning the commonly observed body image disturbance. More specifically, persons with (p. 717) proneness to the symptoms of eating disorders showed a predominance of one dimension of embodiment, namely the lived-body-for-others, which is a concept proposed by Sartre. In addition to the body-subject and body-object dimensions of corporeal ity, Sartre emphasized that one can apprehend one’s own body even from another point of view, as one’s own body when it is looked at by another person. Thus, one’s identity be comes reified by the gaze of the other, and reduced to the external appearance of one’s own body. Therefore, the lived body is no longer direct, first-personal experiential evi Fence, but it is an entity that exists as viewed from an external perspective. This means that the other becomes the mirror in which one can perceive oneself. The comprehension of the profound uneasiness of lived corporeality of eating disorders—leading to the sense of alienation from one’s own body and from one’s own emotions—should be in tegrated with an exaggerated concern to take responsibility for the way one appears to others, as well as the possibility of feeling oneself only through the gaze of the other, through objective measures and through self-starvation. This in terpretation overcomes the general position of the alloplastic personality frequently ob served in subjects with eating disorders. According to this perspective, for persons with eating disorders the other is no longer an interlocutor with which to engage an intersubjective co-creativity relation ship, but is the one who confirms my existence, my being-in-the-world. The gaze of the other becomes the unique way through which we are aware of our own presence. It is as the mirror in which we see ourselves and feel ourselves.

The Language of Body and Eating In some way, eating and feeding disorders represent an example of psychopathology of postmodernity, in which language changes and innovations mirror the fluidity of cultural transformations and their impact on the representation and significance of the body. The dimension of feeling oneself through the gaze of the other and defining oneself through the evaluation of the other can be integrated in the concept of public consciousness. Pub lic self-consciousness, as opposed to private self-consciousness, includes all those quail ties of the self that are formed in other people’s eyes. In fact, persons with eating disorder have a ten ency to think of those aspects of the self that are matters of public display, rather than attending to more covert, hidden aspects of the self, for example, one’s privately held be Fiefs and feelings.

Indeed, the language adopted by persons with eating disorders to define themselves is often excl Lively based on terms regarding objective evaluation of their body, such as large or thin, fat or slim, the way dresses fit around their body, or the proportion of space their body oc copies in a room. In most cases, the terms fat or slim transcend objective measures and regard the moral value of the person: fat means lacking control of one’s instincts, of little worth, and weakness. The use of the word hunger is often present in the speech of per sons with eating disorders to express their difficulty in defining their emotions (alexithymia) and sen Cations, which, again, they perceive as extraneous and dangerous. In the diaries of per Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity sons with eating disorders we can find expressions such as: “I came back home after a terrible day where it all went wrong... I realized I have an irresistible hunger... ” The quality of food transcends its association with taste and can be viewed as a dysfunctional way of ex pressing and modulating (p. 718) emotions: salty and full-bodied foods seem to predomi ate in moments of anxiety, while the sweet, warm, soft or liquid prevail in conditions of sadness: “I want the food that I swallow to be something cuddly... sweet after so many things to love... ”. The term, “pleasure” reported in their di Aries often does not have anything to do with what we generally consider to be pleasure, because it is often equated with the reduction of emotional distress. That is, “pleasure” often arises in these disorders from anesthetic conditions regarding emotions and viscera al sensations, or, in persons with anorexia nervosa, from the perception of hunger during starvation periods.

Concepts of control, starvation, and loss-of-control binge eating have taken on different meanings according to the cultural and historical context. In fact, in ancient Greek and Roman cultures—which identified balance as the highest value for a person—the ideal for eating was that of measure, the absence of voracity. On the contrary, in Celtic and Germanic cultural traditions the big eater was considered a positive and valiant person. In the Germanic mythology and poems of chivalry, the image of the brave warrior was even that of a strong man, greedy, insatiable, and able to swallow huge quantities of food and beverages. Relevant differences al so existed between the Mediterranean and Continental Europe, as demonstrated for ex ample by opposite rules across the monastic orders. The monastic rules in North Europe were harsh and strict, marked by fasting and penance, while in the South (those Bevel oped by Benedict of Norcia, for example) were characterized by a greater sense of bal Once closer to the Roman culture. During the medieval era, binge eat ing was in fact a privilege of the nobility, in light of widespread constant fear of hunger. Regarding semantic and moral values, while nowadays the notion of fat among persons with eating disorders is synonymous with weak, incompetent, and inefficient, in the Middle Ages fat was something desirable: a “fat cheese offered to Charlemagne was described as something delicious”. The term fat also had a positive condo Cation in aesthetics and even in politics. Being fat was a sign of wealth and nutritional well-being; so it meant not only beautiful but also rich and powerful: for example in the Florence of the Middle Ages, the upper class was called popolo grass (fat people). The value of thinness as a symbol of efficiency and productivity appeared only in the eighteenth century, especially in relation to the emergence the bourgeoisie and Puritanism, as opposed to old Europe. Gradually, industrialization al lowed access to adequate food consumption for a wider population. Therefore, the notion of the “binge” lost its positive meaning, and the fear of hunger was replaced by the fear of loss of control.

Concepts of control, starvation, and loss-of-control binge eating have taken on different meanings according to the cultural and historical context. In fact, in ancient Greek and Roman cultures—which identified balance as the highest value for a person—the ideal for eating was that of measure, the absence of voracity. On the contrary, in Celtic and Germanic cultural traditions the big eater was considered a positive and valiant person. In the Germanic mythology and poems of chivalry, the image of the brave warrior was even that of a strong man, greedy, insatiable, and able to swallow huge quantities of food and beverages. Relevant differences al so existed between the Mediterranean and Continental Europe, as demonstrated for ex ample by opposite rules across the monastic orders. The monastic rules in North Europe were harsh and strict, marked by fasting and penance, while in the South (those Bevel oped by Benedict of Norcia, for example) were characterized by a greater sense of bal Once closer to the Roman culture. During the medieval era, binge eat ing was in fact a privilege of the nobility, in light of widespread constant fear of hunger. Regarding semantic and moral values, while nowadays the notion of fat among persons with eating disorders is synonymous with weak, incompetent, and inefficient, in the Middle Ages fat was something desirable: a “fat cheese offered to Charlemagne was described as something delicious”. The term fat also had a positive condo Cation in aesthetics and even in politics. Being fat was a sign of wealth and nutritional well-being; so it meant not only beautiful but also rich and powerful: for example in the Florence of the Middle Ages, the upper class was called popolo grass (fat people). The value of thinness as a symbol of efficiency and productivity appeared only in the eighteenth century, especially in relation to the emergence the bourgeoisie and Puritanism, as opposed to old Europe. Gradually, industrialization al lowed access to adequate food consumption for a wider population. Therefore, the notion of the “binge” lost its positive meaning, and the fear of hunger was replaced by the fear of loss of control.

Nowadays, it is important to consider the role of language and symbols adopted by the media, and their effects on the pathogenesis of eating disorders. Not only do the media glorify a Glen der ideal, they also emphasize its importance, and the importance of appearances in gen real, and they glorify slenderness and weight loss and emphasize the importance of beau Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity ty and appearances. A number of studies have doc Dented the trend of increasing thinness in Playboy centerfolds, Miss America contestants, and fashion models between the 1950s and the 1990s. The multi-billion dollar beauty industry depends on a strong emphasis on the value of beauty and appearances for women, because this supports a consumption-based cul Cure in which the answer for any problem can be achieved by purchasing advertised prod cuts for improving one’s appearance. In another survey, middleaged women were asked what they would most like to change about their lives, and more than half of them said “their (p. 719) weight”. The pervasive body dis satisfaction is so widespread in Western countries that authors coined the term “Korma Dive discontent”. The role of media in the development of body dissat isfaction and eating disorder symptomatology was supported by a recent naturalistic ex pediment conducted in Fiji. Until recently, Fiji was a relatively medianïve society with little Western mass-media influence. In this unique study, the eating at titudes and behaviors of Fijian adolescent girls were measured prior to the introduction of regional television and following prolonged exposure. The results indicate that follow ing television exposure, these adolescents exhibited a significant increase in disordered eating attitudes and behaviors.

How are these epidemic phenomena related to identity? Nordbø et al. suggest that pathological eating behavior represents a tool for achieving a new identity. Skarderud (2007 ) showed that for some persons with eating disorders, changing one’s body is a tool for besom ing another person. They want to change, and changing one’s body serves as both a con Crete and a symbolic tool for such ambitions. Thus, shaping oneself is a “concertized metaphor,” establishing an equivalence between a psychic reality (identity) and a physical one (one’s body shape). As suggested by Surgenor et al., looking into the different ways persons with eating disorders construct the self, especially in relation to their disorder and her apy, has strategic implications for the therapeutic endeavor.

According to the different perspectives presented here, language impacts the experience and definition of the body, which is related to the construction of identity. eating disorders are conj sons in which the process of self-identity construction is interfered with by a profound uneasiness toward one’s own body. eating disorders schematize the relationship among language, body, and identity, as they are ways in which people feel a disturbance of the implicit con Section between Lab, Köper, and body-for-others, and this causes disturbances in identi ty. Societal and cultural norms and values, particularly as expressed in language and sym Cols, may exacerbate this identity split and the distress felt by such individuals, by limit ing the opportunities for self-expression: in eating disorders, this is by having a limited definition of beauty and ideal body.

In eating disorders, the definition of the body can offer a kind of “materialized metaphor” that may be used to shape identity, and patients remain entrenched in the limitations of their corpora alized language, which limits the expression of their own identity.

Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity # Subjective Perception of Space in Eating Visor # Hers Several behaviors and cognitive distortion often taken into account by the psychiatric and cognitive literature can be derived from a basic sense of spatial metamorphosis that is deeply associated with the disorder of corporeality. Patients with eating disorders with a severe Blini cal condition often have been reported to say: “I cannot step through the door,” “I take a lot of space when I’m in a room,” “My body does not fit into my clothes.” Indeed, individu als with eating disorders perform repetitive, often time-consuming, and compulsive behaviors such as long hours of lifting weights, excessive mirror checking or avoidance, comparing one’s appearance with that of others, seeking reassurance about the perceived weight fluctua son, skin (p. 720) picking, camouflaging the perceived changes of the space they feel to occupy (e.g. with hair, makeup, body position, or clothing), frequent clothes changing and frequent body measuring. Although the goal of such behaviors is to diminish the anxiety provoked by the body image concerns, these behaviors often increase and maintain anti ety.

The cognitive literature generically ascribes these behaviors to a body image disturb Dance. However, the disturbance of body image in eating disorders cannot simply be ascertained from a somatosensorial alteration, or a failing of the integration of somatic sensations at differ ent levels. According with the identity disturbance of eating disorders, we can expand the disorder of lived corporeality in terms of space occupied by the body. Therefore, persons with eating disorders re port an extreme polarization of the continuum represented by the sentence: “I am the space that my body occupies.” Bonnier (1893 ) proposed that the space is the unifying ele Bent to define the various somatic and visceral sensations. Therefore, the mental repre sensation of one’s body is first a spatial representation. In this model, the body schema is the mental representation of topography that allows us to first know the space we occupy and that allows us the orientation with respect to the external environment and the Kari ous parts of our body. In line with this position, Fisher and Cleveland address the issue of body image primarily in terms of bodily boundaries, and the body helps to create a sense of individuality in each of us, especially in terms of space. Generally speaking, body image boundaries coincide with those of the physical surface of the body. For per sons with eating disorders, spatiality loses the anthropological feature with “I’m in the skin of my body.” Being in this sense does not mean being “here” or “there” (the basic form of selfexperience—sense of existing as a subject of awareness—rooted in one bodily expert Once), but just being “here” where I occupy a place, a space. Thus, the space become smaller, and becomes too tight to contain my body.

Eating Disorders as Disorders of Embodiment and Identity # Subjective Perception of Time in Eating Visor # Hers Time in patients with eating disorders is often perceived in different ways coherently with their sub jective world related to body experiences and eating behaviors. A phenomenological as sessment for eating disorders must include the subjective perception of time to understand the mean ing of the so called “pathological eating behaviors.” Every human experience is config red on experience of time. Indeed, the stream of consciousness comprises an ensemble of experiences that is unified both at any given time and over time. The temporal continua ity of the representation of the body is altered in patients with eating disorders. Time is no longer in tentionality, and therefore it cannot be a way for being with the other in a simultaneity or in a succession temporality. Merleau-Monty dedicates one of the most important parts of his lecture about the lived body ( Lab ) to be considered as “belonging to the world, being in the world temporality committed.” He focuses on the temporal dimension since the structure of the world is the temporality, following the approach of Husserl’s consciousness of inner time. In this sense, the primary contact with the world is the socalled field of presence, the Lab with its own temporality, in which all our actions take place.

Patients with eating disorders always report the feeling that the body can change continuously. Time is reduced to a mere control function, and in particular to be employed in control (p. 721) and/or loss of control of weight and eating—in other words to monitoring one’s own body over time.

Specific situations or events activate patients’ thoughts and emotions, while at other times these body image experiences are either absent or much more benign. The subject Dive perception of time in eating disorder patients appears to be connected with the temporal disconti unity of the representation of one’s own body, and the need for predictability of one’s own life, which is achieved/failed according to control of eating and weight. For example, there can be activating contexts such as a public party. Persons’ beliefs entail self-evalua Dive social comparisons in which they look extremely fat, and they infer that others at the party notice how fat they are. Diaries often used as a self-monitoring strategy of treat Bent can describe activators of body image dysphoria, and capture such prototypical and troublesome body image states. For the therapist and client alike, this is clinically useful in the process of beginning to understand the essentially scripted nature of the client’s experiences. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Coined in 1939 by K. Schneider (KS), the concept of the first-rank symptoms (FRS) of schizophrenia covers a selection of symptoms allegedly of first-rank importance for the differential diagnosis between schizophrenia and cyclothymia (bipolar disorder). Follow ing a tortuous path, the FRS were eventually adopted as diagnostic criteria in the opera tonal definitions of DSM-third and ICD-10 schizophrenia. FRS consist of three areas of psy chopathology: delusional perception, phenomena of passivity or influence, and certain verbal-acoustic hallucinations. The basic psychopathology governing these phenomena are self-disorders like self-alienation, transitivism, and solipsism, well-known for Blini sans of that time. The question of the diagnostic significance of FRS hangs on their define ition. Deprived of their basic psychopathological structure and hence their specific quail ty through “operationalization,” the FRS no longer appear specific for schizophrenia. The proposed inclusion of self-disorders in the diagnostic criteria for ICD-11 schizophrenia ex Amplified by passivity phenomena may, however, serve to counteract this trend.

Keywords: audible thoughts, commenting voices, conversing voices, delusional perception, differential diagnosis, first-rank symptoms, nosology, passivity phenomena, self-disorder, schizophrenia UNTIL recently, the Schneiderian first-rank symptoms (FRS), a group of psychotic sump toms, have held emblematic significance for making the schizophrenia diagnosis. In ICD-10 the presence of one FRS for one month suffices for establishing the diagnosis, and in DSM-fourth the presence of one such symptom during a one-month active phase. Frequent ly, we not only hear their presence being advanced as an argument for the diagnosis, but even their absence as an argument against it. Empirical studies now seem to indicate that they are non-specific and, accordingly, they are losing importance. In this chapter we will explore the FRS, their rise and fall in clinical psychiatry, and their significance for the di agnosis of schizophrenia.

First-Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia # The Historical Background Nineteenth-century psychiatry knew the phenomena of FRS, but failed to provide suffix ciently detailed definitions and demarcation of them. This task was accomplished by Brae pelin in his textbook of psychiatry, and by Jasper in his General Psychopathology. One example of the early descriptions is Haslam’s nosography of a psychotic pa taint published in 1810, in which extensive experiences of influence caused by an “air loom” are the most salient features.

Symptoms of schizophrenia later known under the name of FRS are frequently mentioned in classic psychiatric textbooks. Kraepelin describes a wide range of hallucinatory phenomena in dementia præcox (schizophrenia), and among these, voices of people speaking about the patient, voices making remarks about the thoughts and the doings of the patient, and the patient’s own thoughts appearing to be spoken aloud, which Kraepelin finds “quite specially peculiar to dementia præcox”. Thoughts being spo ken aloud become “common property.” Still more characteristic of this disease he finds the feeling of one’s thoughts being influenced, “plundered, organized and pub Dished.” Experiences of the body being laid hold of, “twisted”, “vivisected”, etc., result in a (p. 728) conviction in the patient of becoming “the sports of all sorts of influx Fences”. Indifferent remarks and chance looks appear suspicious to the patient and give rise to idiosyncratic interpretations, for example, a fern in a buttonhole indict ing war.

Similarly, Bleuler (1950 ) refers to patients with schizophrenia believing that they are in fluenced by hostile forces, for example, by the means of “mysterious apparatus and mag ic”; cases in which paresthesias are believed to be caused by other people are most ly schizophrenic. The phenomenon of thoughts being heard (Gedankenlautwerden) occurs only very rarely in other psychoses, he notes. These, too, are pre-Schneider ian descriptions of FRS.

Kurt Schneider published a list of FRS in his 1950 textbook, Klinische Psychopathologie (KP), translated into English as Clinical Psychopathology (CP) in 1959. The motivation for promoting certain clinical symptoms of psychosis to first-rank status was the following: Among the many abnormal modes of experience that occur in schizophrenics, there are some which we put in the first rank of importance, not because we think them to be “basic disturbances” but because they have this special value in help ing us to determine the diagnosis of schizophrenia as distinct from nonpsychotic abnormality or from cyclothymia. (CP: 133)

Thus, he dissociative identity disorder not consider these symptoms as fundamental or generative for the symptom matology of schizophrenia the same way as Bleuler’s basic symptoms. The background for his first-rank approach was the pragmatic composition of clinical guidelines for goner al practitioners in a booklet titled Psychischer Refund und psychiatrische Diagnose First-Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia (Beiträge zur Psychiatric) (PB) [ Psychic Symptoms and Psychiatric Diagnosis (Contribu sons to Psychiatry) ].

His emphasis on these symptoms was not based on empirical evidence but rather on Blini cal experience and theoretical considerations as he considered them as expressive of un derlying ego-disturbances (Bürgy 2011): Among the basic attributes of psychic experience, certain disturbances of the sense of identity are highly specific for schizophrenia. By these we mean disturb Dances of the sense of “I,” “me and mine,” which consist in feeling that what one is and what one does have passed under the direct influence of others. These dis turbances have already been considered earlier, and have been demonstrated with reference to thinking, feeling, impulse, and will, and have been spoken of in con Section with thought-withdrawal and the influencing of thought, feeling, impulse (drive), and will.

(Schneider 1959: 120)

Elaborating Jasper’s model of the “consciousness of the self” he found the ego-disturb Dances, or self-disorder, to be constitutive of these symptoms of schizophrenia. The disturbance of the sense of “I” or “me and mine,” often referred to as a loss of Fineness, is an aspect of Jasper’s loss of consciousness of activity according to this model.

Following a number of editions of PB until the mid-1940s, Schneider reused its content in his textbook, published after his appointment as professor of psychiatry in Heidelberg (re placing Carl Schneider, the Nazi professor who committed suicide in 1946, following his internment). And accordingly, FRS came to obtain a prominent place in German (p. 729) psychopathology. British psychiatry still being under strong German influence, the FRS found their way into the Present State Examination in the 1960s (PSE; Kendler 2009; Wing et al. 1974). Actually, its CATEGO-derived core schizophrenia class, S+, is defined from the presence of FRS (and of other delusions and auditory hallucinations).

The introduction of operationalism in nosology also saw a need for specific, well-defined criteria symptoms. Schneiderian first-rank symptoms, already incorporated in the PSE, seemed like perfect candidates because of their “first-rank importance.” They made their first appearance in pre-DSM-third operational Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC; Spritzer et al. 1978) as Thought broadcasting, insertion, or withdrawal... Delusions of being controlled (or influenced)... Auditory hallucinations in which either a voice keeps up a run Ding commentary on the subject’s behaviors or thoughts as they occur, or two or more voices converse with each other.

Not yet named FRS in RDC, these phenomena made their way into the diagnostic ago rithms of DSM-third and DSM-third-R, reaching their acme of significance as FRS in DSM-fourth, in which just one such symptom is needed for the diagnosis of schizophrenia.

First-Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia DSM-5 became the turning point: here, FRS no longer form part of the diagnostic criteria and are just mentioned in passing in the text. Previous to the publication, the evi Fence against the pathognomonic status of the FRS seemed to accumulate; for example, FRS are also found in patients with Effective disorders. Furthermore, the prevalence of FRS in schizophrenia differs considerably across studies, and they do not seem to affect the outcome. Thus, a critical review of thirty-five years of FRS studies by Nordgaard et al. (2008 ) does “not allow for either a reconfirmation or a rejection of Schneider’s claims about FRS,” and, therefore, the authors recommend that the FRS be de-emphasized in the next revisions of the diagnostic systems.

FRS were indeed mentioned in the text of pre-operational ICD-8, but just like in DSM they found their way into the diagnostic criteria of operational ICD-10, and like DSM-fourth they achieved a pathognomonic status, one such symptom present for one month sufficing for the diagnosis of schizophrenia. The FRS are omitted as a separate criterion in ICD-11, and disturbances of self-experience in turn are highlighted.

The Definition and Demarcation of FRS Schneider’s FRS consist of three areas of psychopathology: delusional perception, phe novena of passivity or influence, and certain verbal-acoustic hallucinations. The basic psychopathology governing these phenomena are self-disorders like self-alienation, ran sitivism, and solipsism. These phenomena being well known for clinicians, Schneider con tribute only sketchy descriptions in his writings, a fact allowing ample and divergent in terpretation by later writers.

1. Delusional perception (DP), never part of the DSM criteria, but still comprised by the ICD-10 definition of FRS, is an area of psychopathology which is largely ignored by present-day (p. 730) clinicians. Schneider, referring to the works of Jasper and Gruhle, gives the following definition: Delusional perception (DP) takes place when some abnormal significance, usually with self-reference, is attached to a genuine perception without any comprehensi ble rational or emotional justification.

Schneider emphasizes the two-component ( zweigliedrig ) nature of DP, the one component being the neutral perception, the other one the “groundless” ( hone Alaß ) delusion which apparently cannot be inferred from the otherwise unaffected perception. This simplified model, which has formed the basis for the PSE operational definition of DP, fails to convey the psychological essence of the experience. However, Schneider writes that it cannot be derived from any particular emotional state but often from a delusional atmosphere termed “delusional tension” by Gruhle and the “preparatory field” by Schneider himself. This atmosphere is often an experience of oddness which gains the essence of something significant but, according to Schneider, does not offer content to the delusion.

First-Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia DP belong to the class of primary delusions examined by Jasper (1997: 98ff.; Klaus 2014). Originating in the experiential structure of schizophrenia, they are vividly given, pathic rather than Gnostic by nature, and not yet fully thematized. The elaboration of delusional content is referred to as a secondary delusion. Jasper distinguishes between these true, primary delusions and delusion-like ideas as seen in other, for example, Effective, psy hoses. Paras terms the former group autistic-solipsistic delusions, informed by the autistic and solipsistic aspects of schizophrenic experiencing. The convincing pathic givenness of primary delusions explains the often contradictory explanatory account giv en by the patients, conflicting with their level of intelligence and their life experiences.

Matussek and Conrad (1958 ) expound the psychology of DP. In beginning (para Void) schizophrenia Conrad often finds a psychological tension, for example, between ex Vernal obstacles and personal wishes. A delusional mood evolves as a change in the phys iognomy of the surrounding world, a stage he names the trema (i.e. “stage fright”). In this state the patient is alarmed by the emergence of strangeness, where things no longer form reliable and familiar background for everyday experiencing but begin to vibrate from a disconcerting presence (Génnart 2011: 292). According to Matussek, there is a loosening of the natural perceptual context, for example, a railway station with all the ob Sects belonging there, and an expanded prevalence of the “essential properties” of the perceptual objects. These properties are detached from their specific context and “encir cle” the object like a cloud. By way of an accentuation of the physiognomy of the environs Bent, single isolated aspects come to the fore and acquire intrusive experiential quality, a phenomenon called intrusive derealization. This is the starting point of a delusional, referential interpretation, DP, the salient feature of Conrad’s next stage of schizophrenia, the apophany.

2. The experiences of influence (or passivity phenomena), counted among the FRS by Sch eider (CP: 133–134), are: the experience of influences playing on the body (somatic passivity experiences); thought-withdrawal and other interference with thought; diffusion of thought; delusional perception and all feelings, impulses (drives), and volitional acts that are experienced by the patient as the work or influence of others.

(p. 731) Schneider considers the common structure for these phenomena to be transitives tic, representing “the ‘lowering’ of the ‘barrier’ between the self and the surrounding world, the loss of the very contours of the self.” Thus, they represent the self-disorders in Eluded in Bleuler’s fundamental symptoms in the context of disorders of the “person” or “ego” (1950: 143–147). The phenomena here are psychotic experiences, as they are ac companies by explanatory delusions as to who or how. However, pure transitivistic exp riences may be non-psychotic (or at least only near-psychotic), for example, as an un pleasant experience of confusing oneself with one’s interlocutor, not to be counted as FRS.

First-Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia In the RDC (as we saw above), and in DSM, these phenomena have been reduced to deli ions. DSM-third refers to them as a “belief or experience”, but in the diagnostic rite ria for schizophrenic disorder only as a “bizarre delusion.” In DSM-5 they are men toned in the Glossary of Technical Terms under “delusions”. This implies that the demonstration of a transitivistic experience is no longer viewed as a prerequisite for rating the phenomena.

The diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia of ICD-10 comprise the presence of thought in section, thought withdrawal, thought broadcasting, and delusions of control, influence, or passivity, clearly referred to body or limb movements or specific thoughts, actions, or sen Cations. Thus, there is a differentiation between the listed thought phenomena and the re Gaining phenomena considered delusions. PSE and SCAN manuals, acting as the glob Caries of ICD-10, have sections on “experiences of thought disorder” and “replacement of will” (SCAN 1999: chapter 18) mostly defined as experiences. SCAN even differentiates between thought broadcast proper and delusions of thoughts being read, the latter in Eluding explanatory delusions to thought broadcast but also delusions related to expat chive delusions, not covered by the FRS.

3. The last area of psychopathology to be included in the FRS consists of certain verbalacoustic hallucinations:... hearing one’s own thoughts (or thoughts being audible), voices conversing one with another, and voices that keep up a running comment on the patient’s behave ior.

(CP: 96)

Schneider’s definition of the first of these phenomena, audible thoughts, is rather hazy, and his examples are of little use, for example, “I hear my own thoughts. I can hear them when everything is quiet.” Perceptualization of inner speech, usually acquiring an acoustic quality, is a frequent phenomenon in schizophrenia spectrum patients. What is usually meant by audible thoughts as an FRS is a psychotic transitivistic superstructure in which the patient has an experience of other people being able to perceive his thought, a phenomenon closely related thought broadcasting. Some psychopathological manuals like the PSE and SCAN emphasize that the thoughts should sound aloud, “almost so loud that someone standing nearby could hear them”, an unfortunate criterion as it neglects the altered spatial structure of schizophrenic experiencing, in which the distance does not always matter (also reflected in the so-called extra camping hallucinations, hallucinations beyond the sensory field). What is most important is the experience of thoughts being publicly disclosed. Near-psychotic borderline cases are frequent, in which the patient fears that others might perceive his thoughts, well aware of the impossibility.

(p. 732) Voices conversing one with another, and voices keeping up a running comment on the patient’s behavior are covered by DSM-fourth and ICD-10 (Green Book: 64). Here, these voices are not restricted to third person addressing (i.e. by “he” or “she”). Of First-Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia course, conversing voices are heard in the third-person, but commenting voices not nec essarily so: some patients do hear a voice commenting on their behavior in the second 1 person (“you”). However, some manuals such as PSE and SCAN, define commenting void es as third-person hallucinations. “Third-person voices” are often used as a synonym for FRS-hallucinations, which is incorrect as there are examples that do not belong here (e.g. voices criticizing the patient in the third person).

The running comments are continuous, neutral descriptions of the patient’s acts, like “now he is reading a newspaper,” but the very word, “comment,” tempts to a different in terpretation, namely critical remarks, for example, “she is ugly,” which is not covered by Schneider’s definition.

FRS constitute continua of psychopathological phenomena. Thus, passive ty phenomena, originating in transitivism, can be traced from passivity mood—the mood of being somehow in a passive, dangerously exposed position, at the mercy of the world —through intermediate phenomena like combinations of depersonal ization and experiences of control or influence to clear-cut FRS. KlosterköOtter (1992 ) ex pounds the stepwise development of psychopathology in beginning schizophrenia from basic symptoms (step 1, non-psychotic subjective experiences) as “initial deficiencies” via intermediate phenomena (step 2, more specific basic symptoms closely related to self-dis orders) to FRS, a development named “transition sequence.” So, cognitive disturbance of movement leads to autopsychic depersonalization and eventually to experiences of will being influenced.

The Diagnostic Significance of First-rank # Symptoms Evidence against the pathognomonic significance of FRS for the diagnosis of schizophre nia seems to accumulate. They are reported to be present in many other diagnostic categories than schizophrenia: Effective and non-Effective psy chosis, and even non-psychotic states like neurosis and personality disorder. This latter claim is absurd, as FRS, psychotic symptoms by definition, do not belong in non-psychotic disorders. Their clinical significance has been questioned by the findings in genetic and prospective studies, too.

However, a number of circumstances interfere with these negative conclusions. The first of these is the definition of the FRS themselves. As demonstrated by Koehler, there are many conflicting definitions due to Schneider’s rather ambiguous descriptions of the phenomena. As we saw, passivity phenomena have been redefined as delusions in DSM, thereby neglecting their transitivistic nature, which Schneider regarded as their core (p. 733) phenomenon. Furthermore, different authors do not agree on which phenom ena to include in the FRS.

First-Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia Second, studies examining the affinity of FRS to schizophrenia are based on differing def ignitions of schizophrenia, another neglected area. Historically, there are in the neighborhood of forty definitions of this disease, all differing with regard to criteria of duration, psychopathological content (e.g. in clusion/exclusion of Effective symptoms), sex ratio, and other demographic features, etc. The correspondence between each of these definitions and the core gestalt of schizophre nia, made up by its autistic structure or “basic mood,” is quite unknown. Thus, the claim that FRS are found outside schizophrenia, may depend on the delimitation of the schizo phrenia concept in question. Some schizophrenia definitions (e.g. DSM-fourth and ICD-10) in Elude FRS in their diagnostic criteria rendering the question of the affinity of FRS to schizophrenia almost tautological.

Due to all these conceptual and methodological difficulties FRS are losing their status as pathognomonic symptoms of schizophrenia, already accomplished by DSM-5, in which they are relegated to rank-and-file hallucinations and delusions, a fate to all appearances befalling them in ICD-11, too. In a generation or so we can, therefore, expect clinicians to forget the FRS, as was earlier the case with schizophrenic autism. However, although the concept of FRS is disappearing from ICD-11, too, the passivity phenomena will still play a role in the diagnostic criteria. These phenomena are listed among the core symptoms of schizophrenia under the term, disturbances of self-experience. The exam Ales given in brackets are: the experience that one’s feelings, impulses, thoughts, or be haviour are under the control of an external force. Disturbances in self-experience, or self-disorders, are indeed core phenomena of schizophrenia, and em phasizing these disorders in ICD-11 will hopefully serve to increase the interest among clinicians and researchers for the experiential structure of this disease as a counterpoise to the less specific psychotic phenomena listed in the diagnostic criteria of, for example, DSM-5. A growing body of empirical evidence is accumulating pointing to the specific quality of self-disorders for the diagnosis schizophrenia spectrum disorders and for the prediction of schizophrenia spectrum jag noses. There is already evidence of psychotic symptoms of schizo phrenia, including FRS, emerging from the self-disorders (cf. Koehler’s continua and KlosterköOtter’s transition sequences, mentioned above). More qualitative re search is needed to map out the development of FRS but the necessary prerequisite is the sophistication of the psychopathological concepts beyond the operational definitions of the prevailing diagnostic manuals and psychopathological instruments, and Nordgaard et al. also recommend the application of a phenomenological perspective in future studies aiming at validating FRS as diagnostic features. PAGE_BREAK This chapter examines the relation, if any, between delusion and schizophrenia. The con Dept of delusion belongs to the semantic universe of psychopathology, whereas the con Dept of schizophrenia is concerned with that of nosography. In his 1889 work, Kraepelin brought together disparate syndromes, including hebephrenia and delusional syndromes, under the name of Dementia Praecox on the basis of similar outcomes. The chapter first considers some of the studies that have been undertaken to investigate the outcomes of the illness described by Kraepelin, focusing in particular on E. Bleuler’s concept of “group of schizophrenics” and K. Schneider’s claim that a diagnosis of schizophrenia is a diagnosis of the state and not of the course, and that it is to be founded on Jaspersian psy chopathology. The role of autism (not delusions) as the core of schizophrenia is also dis cussed, along with the fundamental characteristics of schizophrenic delusions.

Keywords: delusion, schizophrenia, psychopathology, nosography, Dementia Praecox, delusional syndromes, group of schizophrenics, Jaspersian psychopathology, autism, schizophrenic delusion # Introduction RETHINKING schizophrenia seems to be a top-priority task for clinical psychopathology and psychiatric nosography today, given the doubts that many of us harbor about the deli nation and delineation of the concept itself as schizophrenic illness, its autonomy, and its limits. In this chapter I address the relation that may or exist not between delusion and the syndrome that we can still call schizophrenia.

Wolfgang Blankenburg writes that phenomenological and Casein -analytical re search has been accused of attending above all to paranoid psychoses, but very little to those syndromes that from the beginning are much more pronouncedly deficient. It is true that in phenomenological and Casein -analytical research delusion has been largely in the forefront because of the many points of support it can offer to interpret the schizo phrenic world. Yet, just as it happens for the whole complex of phenomenological re Schizophrenic Delusion search, current Casein -analytical research too tends to go back from full-blown symptoms like delusions to a more subtle phenomena. As an example, Kimura Bin in his autobiogra phy says, “My gaze rested more on autism than on delusion, more on the structure of ex periencing than on the contents experienced, and more on the crisis of the selfhood of the I in Aida with others than on the disorder of the solipsistic I”. For him, human beings, and they alone, have had to take on during their development the difficult task of integrating the gap between two levels of subjectivity: being a member of human society and a unique individual self. From the phenomenological standpoint, schizophre nia represents a “pathology of being oneself in relation to others”.

Certainly, the association delusion-schizophrenia is an impasse into which the concept of schizophrenia has historically dragged us. But it must be observed first of all that the con Dept of delusion pertains to the semantic universe of psychopathology, while the concept of schizophrenia belongs to that of nosography. There has never been, and perhaps will never be, a complete overlapping of the two spheres, the two fields of research, which utilize different “organizers” and, all in all, operate with purposes that are not identical, despite the project which illuminates the work of Kurt Schneider (1950 ) to base the nosographical category “schizophrenia” on exclusive psy chopathological foundations, such as first-rank symptoms, and among these delusional perception.

(p. 737) Looking for the Core of Schizophrenics The great synthesis made by Kraepelin brought together under the name of De mentia Praecox disparate syndromes, from hebephrenia to delusional syndromes, on the principle of similar outcomes, fatally destined to a chronic condition of disintegration sim liar to dementia. Kraepelin himself at a certain point distinguished these syndromes from paraphrenia, since in the latter there are conspicuous chronic delusions which nonethe less do not evolve toward a state of decline or toward a pervasive hermetic closure of the sufferer into his own idiosyncratic world.

In the century that has passed since then, a long sequence of studies have been carried out on the outcomes of the illness described by Kraepelin, and later united by E. Bleuler (1911 ) into the concept of “group of schizophrenics.” Even if Bleuler was not much more optimistic than Kraepelin about the outcome of schizophrenics, his shift of emphasis onto the dynamic-psychological mechanisms of the disorder, and his idea that in any case it was a question of a kind of “Effective dementia” and not a cognitive one, encouraged the investigation of possible prognoses entailing some sort of reversibility. One of the most accurate evaluations of the factors influencing the course and outcomes of schizophrenia is the one conducted many years ago as part of the international study these aspects of schizophrenia: of the forty-seven probable predictors analyzed, the most powerful predictor of a negative course is the pre-psychosis condition of deficient integral son into social and sexual life. It is not difficult to see in this empirical observation a ref Terence to possible autistic traits in the personality before the onset of illness.

Schizophrenic Delusion Bleuler’s thesis was that the core of the group of schizophrenics was a disorder of assoc Cation. The thesis affirming that the primary and essential phenomenon characterizing schizophrenic syndromes is the splitting of the mind has been shown to be quite vague in its clinical application, to the point of expanding, as has happened in the past, the bound Aries of schizophrenia virtually ad libitum, in a sort of evaporation of the concept itself.

The next attempt, markedly coherent in terms of methodology and radical in its linearity, was certainly that of K. Schneider who asserted that a diagnosis of schizophrenia is a di agnosis of the state and not of the course, whatever it might be, and that it is to be found ed on Jaspersian psychopathology, that is to say, on the study of the patient’s subjective experiences. It is this study that has led to the identification of some Erlebnisse considered typical, and that have been translated on a semiological level as “first-rank symptoms.” The impact that this way of thinking has had and continues to have in the clinical diagnosis and treatment of schizophrenics is enormous, because of the epistemic rigor that characterizes it, and the “first-rank symptoms” have become a part of every di agnostic system of schizophrenia, whether directly or “camouflaged.” Schneiderian psy chopathology of schizophrenia excludes from the defining features of schizophrenia the linear progress toward chronic states, abolishing in this way at least what had been “Kraepelin’s principle.” It also excludes the fundamental role that the associative Visor der had had in Bleuler’s definition of schizophrenia and its outcomes. “Lesser degrees of ‘being unhinged’ ( Zerfahren ) in thought and language can be found everywhere,” Schnei der wrote. Yet first-rank Schneiderian symptoms, or symptoms that closely reset ble these, are also present in the circle of manic-depressive psychoses, especially in the so-called “mixed” states or rapid swings between mania and major depression.

(p. 738) Autism (Not Delusions) as the Core of # Schizophrenia After the failure of the effort of a large part of contemporary psychiatry to define the schizophrenic disorder according to operational criteria, the thesis prevailed that no symptom is in and of itself pathognomonic of schizophrenia and that “schizophrenic-Bess” derives from an overall context perceived by the observer and in which the various sump toms are immersed. That is to say, that what is relevant to grasp the core of schizophre nia is the peculiar atmosphere that typically colors the various symptoms. This approach is aimed at an intuitive kind of knowledge, a sort of pre-categorical grasping or feeling. To this approach the concept “autism” is not simply a symptom in the patient, but also a sub jective feeling in the observer.

This is the type of program we would truly need in order to adapt Bleuler’s insight about autism to the clinical understanding of schizophrenia. But up to now it has been the case that the very essence of autism, which makes it a different and specific way of being, dis appeared when the attempt was made to transcribe it into defining categories, character istics observable within the sphere of natural experience. Paras and Covet (1991 ), for ex ample, reveal themselves to be well aware of this methodological risk when they write Schizophrenic Delusion that autism “disintegrates” in the descriptive-objectivist model of medicine and that it de Dies every operational formulation.

It seems that we are condemned to a sort of vicious circle in which the symptoms with a high degree of reliability (e.g. certain delusional or hallucinatory experiences) turn out to be not specific or reflect the construct validity of the schizophrenia concept, or at any rate secondary, and moreover do not necessarily transmit the essence of the pathology of the spectrum of the schizophrenic condition; while more global phenomena, like autism, seem more specific, and more precursory, but lose, at least in part, their validity as jag Gnostic tools when they are delineated in objective-behavioral symptoms. Naturally, the pa taint does not talk about autism per se. Yet persons with schizophrenia can make us per cave their problematic position, their lived experience of “ ontological ” (and not simply “Antic-existential”) insecurity compared to the naturalness of others and their “shared sense” of the real world. This dramatic lack of the pre-cognitive and pre-verbal grip which is manifested in the lack of common sense. The disorder of attunement with the world of everyday life, the evanescence of the “vital contact with reality,” finds in autism its most salient point right in the relationship with other people. It is this aspect that, all in all, permits schizophrenia to be described as a “pathology of encounter.”

Minkowski’s concept of “vital contact with reality” can be traced back to a famous state Bent by Husserl (1936 ): within the vital flow of intentionality of which the life of a sub Sect-I consists, every other I is already, from the beginning, intentionally involved on the path of empathy and the empathetic horizon. Besides, it has been noted that the loss of intersubjective obviousness, which leaves the schizophrenic (or pre-schizophrenic) per son so often and so dramatically at the mercy of the drift of “perplexity” and “hyperreflex ivity,” takes on pathological relevance because of its forced disproportion and invasive spread. Binswanger adopts the term Verschrobenheit (a term that can be translate ed as eccentricity or queerness, that according to the Oxford Concise Dictionary perhaps originates from German queer, meaning oblique or thwart; another option would be bizarreness) to describe a way (p. 739) of being which he saw as largely superimposable onto the concept of autism. A number of the most recent studies maintain that traces of the “complex” represented by autism and its being inextricably connected to self-disorders can be seen in the pre-schizophrenic personality and in the spectrum of schizophrenic disorders, and sometimes even in blood relatives who are not ill. If we consider autism to develop where an “empirical” Ego attempts to make up for the defeat of the foundation of the “transcendental” Ego, the course of schizophrenia can commence when psychotic states of consciousness meet with a person marked by this fragility.

The hypothesis that emerges from all this is the following: autism could be the specific factor that ultimately makes schizophrenic symptoms, like delusions, schizophrenic, im Versing the psychopathological phenomena into that particular “atmosphere” so often evoked when discussing schizophrenia.

Schizophrenic Delusion # The Autistic “Taint” Characterizing Schizo # phrenic Delusions One thing is certain: in practice, a clinician begins to think that that delusion is of the schizophrenic kind when certain aspects emerge that lend a particular “atmosphere” to it. These aspects can belong to the content of delusion; for example, when in the subject of persecutor delusion, persecutors are more faceless groups, agencies, or associations than individual identifiable persons, this is a feature that makes it more likely to be of the schizophrenic kind. This sends us back to the defective constitution of the Self and of the Other as subjects, and the homogenization and relative abstraction of the persecutors re Elects not only their inaccessibility and distance as individuals, but seems to favor the emergence of universal and ontological elements that prevail over worldly elements.

It is well known that the contents of delusions can vary according to the patient’s cultural and historical milieu. Where once reference was more often made, for ex ample, to possession, magic, etc., now the reference is more often to electronic devices. The change is particularly evident in schizophrenic delusion, as opposed for instance to melancholic delusion, highlighting that schizophrenia concerns “the historicalness of Da Rein ” compared to melancholy, so that—Binswanger continues—every schizophrenic has, so to speak, his own schizophrenia in relation to his own life-history and the alternatives that derive from that, while the melancholic has the melancholy of all melancholic persons, that is to say, he suffers from a generic threat of Casein (including guilt, ruin, and physical illness).

In the meantime perhaps we should distinguish between “contents” and “themes” of deli ion: it is the former that change culturally, while the latter continue to send us back to the fundamental schizophrenic problem of the altered or deficient foundation of inter-sub jectivity and the individuation of the Self. This is what leads to delusion, which expresses and at the same time attempts to make up for this deficit, a “metaphysical quality”. Klaus has called attention to the way delusional ideas with a “technical” content (a pronounced presence of electronic media in the delusion) are found above all in schizophrenia and how this points us to an abnormal “permeability” of the (p. 740) I–World boundaries and thus to the experiences of outside action. This is perhaps the trans-cultural theme of schizophrenic delusion: the feeling of uncertain and blurred Self–World relationship—the very theme of schizophrenic autism.

Another typical theme of schizophrenic delusions is genealogy or one’s origin and nature. Not infrequently, too, delusional ideas which seem peculiarly schizophrenic emerge in the sphere of the problem of the individual’s origins. Delusion about one’s ge nealogy can however assume different contents (e.g. being a descendant of the Czar, or the belief that one is Napoleon) as was the case in the last centuries; although the con tent may change through the ages, nonetheless the theme that can be found in the back ground in many patients with schizophrenia is the concern with one’s origin alluding to Schizophrenic Delusion the schizophrenic’s central problem of identity: the constitution of identity of the I based on being oneself also in relation to others. Racamier argues that the node of the schizophrenic imaginary universe (the “ghost of self-generation”), would contain the pos sibility of telling us something about the constitutive moment of schizophrenia, so differ ent from the paranoiac romance: not simply an Antic discourse about one’s noble Dances tors, but an ontological one about one’s very nature as a non-human being—sometimes referred to as the “bizarreness” of schizophrenic delusions. Thus the content (or the frag Bents of content) of a schizophrenic delusion tells us of autism, that is, of an ontological catastrophe, the crisis of “Who” which seems central in the disastrous psychotic courses which we call schizophrenia.

Another fundamental characteristic of schizophrenic delusions is their form, further pre Oise features which characterize them rather than delusions in general. In schizophrenic delusions a personal, relevant meaning becomes manifested; to this meaning the patient gives the value of evidence, of a penetrating sign coming from a higher reality, lived in an atmosphere which appears to the observer, but not to the subject, as one of great recap Dive passivity of the meanings emanating from objects. The basic problem is if a structure of being-delusional exists that is specific to being-schizophrenic. The anthropological de vice of “revelation,” by means of which new “truths” appear to consciousness, defines perhaps the “primary” delusion (as is the case with delusional perceptions) as opposed to the delusion-like ideas, centered conversely on the device of “confirmation” of a blunted affect and an intolerance of ambiguity, more than defining a specifically schizophrenic delusion. Nonetheless Klaus’s analyses, delineate a way of being in deli ion, which certainly is closer than any others to a delusional world such as is most topi ally present in a schizophrenic. Klaus underlined how these differences in the various ways of being delusional are particular evident with respect to “delusional certainty”: whereas in manic-depressives this is marked by “intolerance of ambiguity” leading to the adoption of a unilateral way of thinking; in persons with schizophrenia the “delusional certainty” has precisely the traits of revelation, in that there appear “new formations which take the place of reality.”

We can return to the topic of the relationship between delusion as “confirmation” or con Tersely as “revelation,” paying special attention to the processes that lead to the actual ization of meanings, as Stanghellini and Ballerina proposed: the change in the Bela tionship between subject and object. A proportion exists in normality between the sense of being the author of the world’s meanings and what the world’s objects seem to reveal to us by themselves, and every excited state or rigidly fixed idea shifts this proportion. It is with the dramatic and extreme vanishing of the I’s activity and I’s total passivity that things are experienced as emanating meanings that impose themselves as a Diktat, a pen etrating sign (p. 741) coming from a higher reality, lived in an atmosphere experienced by the patient in a state of total passive receptiveness.

Many of us have never believed that schizophrenia can be defined only by means of “ob Rectifiable,” conventional symptoms, and this is accompanied by great caution in making a Schizophrenic Delusion diagnosis of schizophrenia, especially on the part of those who do not identify schizophre nia with primary delusion.

And yet we can perhaps find warning clues, more than in the phenomenon of delusion in general, in particular thematic-formal aspects of delusion, which mark the crisis of the obviousness of the ontological foundation of the Self and the World, that is to say, of self Bess in intersubjectivity. The essential point here, for the schizophrenic, is the possibility, along the course of an ante-festum temporality, to achieve in the future the possibility of an I capable of being itself in the intersubjective dimension, warding off the risk of alien Cation to not-I. PAGE_BREAK This article examines the clinical concept of delusional atmosphere or mood, which de notes a predelusional state that may precede the formation of primary delusion in schizo phrenia. Delusional mood refers to a global, diffuse, ominous feeling of something (not yet defined) impending. This article explores how schizophrenia spectrum patients usual ly experience delusional mood and it accounts for certain typical phases that tend to lead to the crystallization of primary delusion. In brief, delusional mood often involves an in crease of basic Effective tone, followed by an atmosphere of apprehension, free-floating anxiety, guilt, or depression, perhaps of something impending. The delusional mood be comes increasingly self-referential and eventually the world may come to be experienced as staged, artificial, or unreal. The current diagnostic manuals make no reference to deli signal mood and thus it risks slipping “under the radar” or being mistaken for, for exam ple, expressions of anxiety or depression.

Keywords: schizophrenia, predelusional state, delusional mood, delusional atmosphere, primary delusion # Introduction THE clinical concept of delusional mood or atmosphere ( Wahnstimmung ) denotes a psy chopathological syndrome that tentatively may be defined as a global, diffuse, ominous feeling of something (not yet defined) impending. Since delusional mood often precedes delusion formation, it has also been labeled “the predelusional state.” The significance of delusional mood or the predelusional state was already noted by several nineteenth-cen 1 Bury psychiatrists. However, there is no empirical-epidemiological data on its frequency; thus, we are not able to rule out that the majority of delusions in schizophrenia are pre ceded by elements of delusional mood, but there is no data to this effect. Although deli signal mood is listed in some psychopathological assessment tools like the Present State 2 Examination, the contemporary diagnostic manuals (ICD-10 and DSM-5) make no refer Once to delusional mood and often it risks slipping “under the radar,” that is, being Dunno iced or perhaps misinterpreted, for example, as manifestations of anxiety or depression, Delusional Mood which, as we will see, are in fact frequent manifestations of delusional mood. Delusional mood is only rarely detected in routine clinical work. Detection of delusional mood re quires an in-depth psychopathological interview, focusing upon the pre-onset features of the patient’s subjective experiences, which rarely happens in a standard, routine clinical setting. When detected, it is typically in patients with well-defined, abrupt onset of psy chosis, who are able to give an account of their experience of incipient psychosis.

In this article, we explore how patients usually experience delusional mood, we account for its central features, and we seek to elicit certain typical phases that tend to lead to the crystallization of primary delusion. First, we examine Jasper’s description of delusional mood, which illuminates several of its key features. Jasper, however, does not explore these features in any detail, so to provide a comprehensive account of delusional mood, we must go beyond Jasper, seeking to unfold what is only implicitly present in his de Ascription. Second, (p. 744) we examine Conrad’s notion of “trema,” which offers important 3 contributions to the study of delusional mood. Initially, it merits attention that we are not exploring the predelusional state of psychosis generally but of schizophrenia specifically, that is, we are exploring a particular “mood” from which primary delusion may arise (Jasper 1997: 98f.; cf. Barrios 1996: 125). Moreover, we neither suggest that delusional mood is always clinically detectable prior to the emergence of delusion nor that the pres Once of delusional mood necessarily leads to delusion formation. In other words, we as Fume that delusional mood may occur episodically and recede spontaneously without leading to the emergence of primary delusion. In some patients with schizotypal disorder, we may observe brief, psychotic-near experiences that possess the structure of delusional mood.

Phenomenology of Delusional Mood “Something is going on; do tell me what on earth is going on... How do I know, but I’m 4 certain something is going on ” (Jasper 1997: 98; author’s italics). This famous quote from a patient of Sandburg’s illuminates core features of the experience of delusional mood. Patients are somehow certain that “something” is going on or that “something” is about to happen. Still, the more precise nature of this “something” eludes their grasp; it has not yet taken form or materialized into something more concrete, into a proper “ob Sect” so to say. The transformation of this perplexed state of atmospheric insecurity into a definable object marks the very onset of psychosis, viz. delusion formation (e.g. “I’m un der surveillance,” “I’m being tested,” etc.). This puts delusional mood in a central position —as Conrad puts it, “Here we refer to the most important concept of classical psychiatry, i.e. delusional mood, which signifies the peculiar borderland between normal and psy 5 chaotic experience” (2002: 83). In delusional mood, Jasper argues, patients “feel Duncan ny [‘unheimlich ’]... Everything gets a new meaning. The environment is somehow differ ent” (1997: 98; author’s italics). He specifies that perceptual content remains unchanged in itself and yet everything appears in the light of a subtle, all penetrating, uncertain, and uncanny change, “something is in the air” (ibid.). Jasper also argues that the “delusional atmosphere with all its vagueness of content must be unbearable. Patients obviously suf Delusional Mood fer terribly under it and to reach some definite idea at last is like being relieved from some enormous burden” (ibid.). Finally, quoting Haven, Jasper (p. 745) notes that pa taints feel that “they have lost grip on things, they feel gross uncertainty which drives them instinctively to look for some fixed point to which they can cling” (ibid.). This fixed point, lending perspective, stability, certainty, and frequently also some form of ease, is the delusion.

Jasper’s description, though dense and underdeveloped, offers important clues for un raveling the complexities of the phenomenon of delusional mood. First, it is a “mood” (“ Stimmung ”), not an emotion or affect. Roughly put, emotions and affects topi ally have intentional objects (e.g. we are glad about something, happy for someone, etc.), whereas moods have no distinct intentional objects. Their intentional directedness, if we can speak of one, is more global and diffuse (e.g. if we are sad, everything appears to us 6 in the light of sadness). In Heideggerian terms, we could say that moods constitute “an irreducible background that determines the way the world is disclosed to us” ( Henriksen et al. 2010: 361; cf. Heidegger 2007: 172–179) or, as Radcliffe puts it, moods “constitute a kind of anchor that ties us to the world and opens it up as a meaningful realm of delibera son and action”. In delusional mood, the world appears strangely, yet indefin ably different. Events or objects lose their natural sense of familiarity, purposefulness, and coherence, and the world itself becomes increasingly uncanny (“ unheimlich,” literally meaning “non-homely”)—that is, the patient no longer feels at home or at ease in the world.

Jasper’s description, though dense and underdeveloped, offers important clues for un raveling the complexities of the phenomenon of delusional mood. First, it is a “mood” (“ Stimmung ”), not an emotion or affect. Roughly put, emotions and affects topi ally have intentional objects (e.g. we are glad about something, happy for someone, etc.), whereas moods have no distinct intentional objects. Their intentional directedness, if we can speak of one, is more global and diffuse (e.g. if we are sad, everything appears to us 6 in the light of sadness). In Heideggerian terms, we could say that moods constitute “an irreducible background that determines the way the world is disclosed to us” ( Henriksen et al. 2010: 361; cf. Heidegger 2007: 172–179) or, as Radcliffe puts it, moods “constitute a kind of anchor that ties us to the world and opens it up as a meaningful realm of delibera son and action”. In delusional mood, the world appears strangely, yet indefin ably different. Events or objects lose their natural sense of familiarity, purposefulness, and coherence, and the world itself becomes increasingly uncanny (“ unheimlich,” literally meaning “non-homely”)—that is, the patient no longer feels at home or at ease in the world.

Second, the subtle, all penetrating change (“ ales durchdringende Veränderung ”) imbues everything with a “new meaning.” Jasper does not explain this claim; he only states that the content of perception remains unchanged. In our view, which is inspired by Heideg ger, Conrad, and Matussek (1987 ), the “new meaning” arises not from 7 changes in perceptual experience per se but rather from a global, gestaltic change. Thus, the coffee mug in front of me still appears to me as a coffee mug; its meaning is in itself unaltered. Rather what seems to be changed is the overarching meaning structure (“Bedeutsamkeit ”), that is, the world as a practical and functional context in which ob Sects are embedded and from which they receive their meaning (Heidegger 2007: 114– 122; Gennart 2011: 292). In delusional mood, the context’s mutually implicative referee ital functions are somehow loosened or weakened, decontextualizing singular perceptual elements from their ordinary, contextual embeddedness and enabling new, unfamiliar meanings to emerge alongside the familiar ones (cf. Matussek 1987: 90). For example, the casual look of a stranger in the street or the tone of voice of a waitress could indicate that they “know” what is going on; the manufacturer’s print on the coffee mug could be a sign pointing to the nature of the impending, etc. Eventually, the patient may experience that objects, events, or others, as Fuchs puts it, no longer “present” themselves in the phe nomenological sense of the term, but “only pretend to be just themselves” ( Fuchs 2005: 136; author’s italics), leaving an impression of a strange, unreal, artificial, or staged world—a typical form of derealization in schizophrenia ( Jansson 2015: 64–65).

Delusional Mood (p. 746) Third, “do tell me what on earth is going on,” the patient said. This complaint may be taken to indicate that she suspects or begins to suspect that someone actually knows what is happening but intentionally is withholding this crucial piece of information from her. Experiences of self-reference is regularly an inherent part of the clinical picture of delusional mood, that is, the patient becomes aware that whatever is going on or is about to happen is somehow directly linked to or has special significance for her. Jansson offers the following paradigmatic example of primary self-reference in schizophrenia—“She felt that everybody was looking at her for no reason ” (2015: 57; our italics). The emphasis is critical, that is, the patient’s feeling that others are looking at her is not motivated by or carries traces of underlying or preceding mental states such as feelings of insecurity, inf Priority, guilt, paranoia, etc. In other words, her experience of others looking at her is pri Cary in the sense that the immediately sensed link between her and others is psychology 8 ally irreducible. In delusional mood, this self-referential awareness, that is, the aware Bess that whatever is going on or about to happen is intimately tied to the patient, spa rates the patient from others and puts the patient in a unique, central position in the world; increasingly, it seems as if everything turns around the patient—a manifestation of a quasi-solipsistic, existential stance.

Eventually, Auspiciousness and mistrust permeate the entire life world. In this perplexed state, the patient struggles to make sense of her experiences. Desperately, she searches for solutions or answers, seeking that “fixed point” that can explain what is going on and which she is almost destined to cling to. Notably, Ey called the cognitive efforts in this search for meaning and explanation for the “psychotic work” (“ le travail psychotique ”). Through the patient’s “psychotic work,” the atmospheric uncertainty of the delusional mood, combined with the revelatory (apophantic) givenness of the primary delusional experience, is eventually cognitively elaborated into specific delusional con tents or “objects”.

Eventually, Auspiciousness and mistrust permeate the entire life world. In this perplexed state, the patient struggles to make sense of her experiences. Desperately, she searches for solutions or answers, seeking that “fixed point” that can explain what is going on and which she is almost destined to cling to. Notably, Ey called the cognitive efforts in this search for meaning and explanation for the “psychotic work” (“ le travail psychotique ”). Through the patient’s “psychotic work,” the atmospheric uncertainty of the delusional mood, combined with the revelatory (apophantic) givenness of the primary delusional experience, is eventually cognitively elaborated into specific delusional con tents or “objects”.

Fourth, it is well established that primary delusions in schizophrenia (i.e. delusional per 9 caption and delusional ideas) are imbued with a sense of absolute, apodictic certainty (“Gewißheitsbewußstein ”). However, as Müleer-Slur points out, “even in the so-called delusional mood, where the situation is characterized by a consciousness of uncertainty [‘Beaußstein der Ungewißhat ’] and anxiety, this consciousness of uncertainty [‘Ungewißheitsbewußstein ’] in schizophrenics is absolutely certain ” (1950: 45; our ital ics). Of course, the patient does not know what is going on, but she has not a shred of a doubt that something is in fact going on. Thus, delusional mood is an emblematic stage for the formation of primary delusional phenomena. According to Müleer-Slur, the depth and quality of experiential certainty is a distinctive feature of schizophrenia. Where the formation of non-schizophrenic delusion begins with Auspiciousness in the pre-psychotic stage (“does that perhaps mean something?”), which only gradually solidifies the deli signal conviction in a progressive and inferential fashion, the formation of delusion in schizophrenia is already in the delusional mood, in the midst of all its uncertainty and vagueness, permeated by a strong sense of certainty (“that means something!”) (ibid.).

Delusional Mood (p. 747) So far, we have sought to unfold the complexities of delusional mood implied in Jasper’s description. In the following, we explore Conrad’s notion of “trema,” which in Eludes delusional mood as one of its temporally more advanced features but which also entails a more comprehensive outlook at the late prodromal experiential and existential changes in incipient psychosis.

The “Trema”

In his seminal book Die beginnende Schizophrenia, Conrad combines phenomenal 10 ogy and gestalt psychology in an analysis of 107 patients with schizophrenia. On the ba sis of this material, Conrad elicits a stage model of incipient schizophrenia, comprising the “trema” (the near-psychotic phase), the “apophantic” and “apocalyptic” phases (psy chosis), the consolidation, and the residual state. For the purpose of this article, we dis cuss only the “trema” and its features.

Conrad adopts the notion of “trema” from the world of theater, where it signifies the actor’s “state of tension” (“ Spannungszustand ”) before going on stage (2002: 42), to em 11 phasize how the near-psychotic phase is experienced by patients. This heightened state of tension has the effect of restraining the psychic total field (“ Gesamtfeld ”) by raising mental barriers that enclose and limit the individual’s mind and freedom. Unlike the actor or athlete who may decide not to perform, the patient cannot leave this changed, re strained psychic field. Unable to escape and with pressure accumulating and mental bar rears continuing to rise, the patient is inevitably pushed toward the critical point. Follow ing Conrad’s conception of the dynamics of the psychic field, the pressure may only de crease and the mental barriers fall once the critical point is crossed. This crossing, how ever, is never neutral; it allows for only two outcomes: victory or defeat, increase or de crease of self-esteem (2002: 43). The kernel of the critical point gravitates around expert Fences of something decisive impeding. This particular feature of the “trema,” Conrad, fol lowing Jasper, calls “delusional mood.” Delusional mood is, however, often preceded by or, more correctly, intertwined with other features of the “trema” (2002: 87), including an increase of basic Effective tone (“erhöten Bodenaffektivität ”), indications of guilt or de pressie-like states, and mistrust. To elicit these three features of the “trema,” we bring, in the following, our translation of a selected extract of Conrad’s textbook example (2002: 21–38). For this purpose, we (p. 748) have intentionally have left out major parts of the textbook example, concerning the fully formed psychotic experiences, etc.

While living with his parents [at the age of 18; approximately two years earlier], Fainer reports that he had the impression that they reproached him for support ing him for so long. This “pressure” led him to drop out of high school and take a job at the tax authority, which he din’t really want and which also prevented him from pursuing the military career he desired. He later joined the RAD (“Reich Ar bats-Dienst”, i.e. the national work force) and was deployed in southern France, building roads and cutting down trees. From the very moment he was deployed, he felt under pressure, as if an extraordinary work effort was expected from him.

Delusional Mood For some time, he had the impression that “something was in the air”, but he could’t tell what it was. Then “rumors” spread, sort of in the background, that he, as the only one, would be promoted to scout leader. No names were ever men toned but it was clear to him that he would be chosen. For this reason, the others suddenly became very hostile toward him. During a break, the bags of bread were not in proper shape and his superior told him, “Bring in it order. You are response ble to me”; a hint of his upcoming promotion. Similar hints occurred constantly.

He din’t talk to the others, as he feared their envy. 2–3 days passed. The others looked strangely at him and acted all but friendly toward him. From converse sons, he soon realized that he would get a special “role” during the night, perhaps he would be taken into the open and burn marked with a symbol of hammer and sickle. He decided to stay awake that night and resist. From the creaking of the floorboards and the beds, he could clearly hear, how they tried to sneak up on him. He jumped out of bed to attack his opponent but there was none. As soon as he lay down, they started to sneak up on him again, and all the time he had to jump up. When the guards entered the room, he immediately sensed that they were “instructed”. They found him near the stove and gave him a warning. When they later that night again found him standing by the stove instead of lying in his bed, he was locked in the guardroom. It was quite clear that they “knew”. Return ing to his barrack in the morning, everybody “knew” and he felt surrounded by a hostile atmosphere. Even his best friend asked him, “quite innocently”, what was wrong. Everybody was dissembling. Undoubtedly, they wanted to see how he re acted.

Fainer later explains his time in the RAD as a preparation period, where he was being tested for a military career as officer (2002: 22–24).

First, a slightly increased basic Effective tone is already detectable in Fainer’s impression that his parents “reproached” him, which caused enough pressure and mental barriers to make him change his planned career path; he quit high school and took a job at the tax authority. Conrad notes that the parents dissociative identity disorder not reproach him and they were in fact disap pointed with his hasty decision to leave school (2002: 41). Later, when deployed, the al ready increased basic Effective tone intensifies significantly—he now feels “under pres sure,” as if something extraordinary is expected of him, eventually culminating in the ex perience of something crucial impeding, something intimately related to himself.

According to Conrad, a frequent manifestation of the increased basic Effective tone is the so-called “crazy actions” (“ Unsinnige Handlungen ”), which often leave us baffled. Accord ing to Conrad, “crazy actions” should be grasped within the context of the patient’s al treed psychic field. These seemingly incomprehensible actions can, at least partly, be un derstood as attempts to overcome an unbearable, inner tension or pressure by a gross vi Elation of the given situational context and its rules (2002: 66). Conrad offers several ex maples of “crazy actions” (2002: 63–69). We will only mention one, namely that of a wen ty-four-year-old sergeant, Hiltfried K., who, as his troops’ advance stopped in the vicinity Delusional Mood of Paris, took his (p. 749) service vehicle and, breaking explicit orders, drove with some privates under his command to Paris to show them the beauty of the city and to instill in them respect of the enemy’s culture—an incredible transgression of the German military discipline, which made the sergeant’s behavior appear completely “mad” in the eyes of his superiors (2002: 68). Prior to the incident, the sergeant’s behavior had been impecca ble, but for long he had felt “a terrible tension” and he was utterly disappointed in his comrades who plundered during the troops’ advance.

Second, the increased basic Effective tone often manifests with a tonality of guilt, anxiety, potentially fear of death or depression (2002: 69) but also occasionally of anticipatory ex citement, euphoria, or manic-like loss of inhibition (2002: 73). In the case of Fainer, Con rad argues that feelings of guilt must have accompanied the impression of his parents’ “reproach”; otherwise it seems unlikely that he would have changed his career plans (ibid.). In other patients, guilt feelings are far more prominent. Conrad offers another ex ample: One patient (case 88), who once had a relationship and intercourse with a widow, cannot stop ruminating about whether or not she might report him for having in feted her with a venereal disease. Admittedly, he had never had a venereal dis ease but he could not be absolutely sure. He had no idea why she should now wish to destroy him but he assumed it was a revenge for him calling off the relation ship. These ruminations rendered him unable to sleep or work. A few weeks later, he developed severe psychosis with self-reference, believing that disguised police men were monitoring him in the ward (2002: 74).

Such experiences of guilt, which, most importantly, are not motivated by any offense that may explain the presence and persistence of guilt, are, according to Conrad, indicative of a changed structure of experience. The patient seems to experience a kind of chasm, di Aiding and even isolating him from others and the shared world. As Conrad puts it, “in horror, the patient feels that he has lost the possibility of a ‘we’, the sense of community. In the most dreadful way, he is banished to his own world. The possibility of crossing [‘Überstieg ’] is drawn into question, almost already lost” (2002: 73). A few aspects merit explication: i) the chasm is not a mental barrier, similar to those we described above, which can be torn down or penetrated, for example, by a “crazy action”; ii) the chasm is far more absolute, unbridgeable as it were, separating the guilty from the innocent; and iii) though invisible to others, the chasm “is unforgettable to the guilty” (2002: 70–71). Conrad seems to suggest that traces of such a profound separation from the shared world can be found in nearly all forms of “trema” (2002: 73). This observation coheres with ideas found elsewhere in phenomenological psychopathology, for example, in Binswanger, who argues that the core of schizophrenia, in the case of Ellen West, consists in an irrec oncilable breach between her own, private world (“ Eigenwelt ”) and the shared-social world (“ Mitwelt und Umwelt ”); or, in Henriksen and Paras, who argue that many patients with schizophrenia adopt “a double ontological orientation... which refers to the predicament (and ability) of simultaneously living in two different worlds, namely the shared-social world (i.e. the Delusional Mood natural ontological attitude) and a private, psychotic world (i.e. a solipsistic ontological attitude)” ( Henriksen and Paras 2014: 544).

Third, mistrust is the final feature of the “trema,” characterized also by the increased ba sic Effective tone. “It is not what people do or say that affect us but rather what they do not say or what they do behind our backs; what they intend to do, what they hide, what they talk about when we are not around” ( Conrad 2002: 80; author’s italics). As already noted, perceptual (p. 750) contents remain unchanged in themselves. By contrast, the change, springing from this pervasive, all-piercing form of mistrust, consists in the “ loss of the background’s neutrality ” (ibid.; author’s italics). Usually, the background lurks un noticed in the periphery of our experiential field, but in the “trema” it may take on “en Direly different properties” (ibid.). In the state of mistrust, anything eluding one’s grasp or thematic focus of attention becomes “a barrier,” loaded with an atmospheric quality of hostility or aggression. This is aptly illustrated in the case of Fainer, who describes how others looked strangely at him, acted unfriendly toward him, were envious, dissembling, etc. Even his best friend’s “innocent question” regarding Fainer’s wellbeing was by no means innocent, that is, it had an ulterior motive, etc. Conrad also describes how another patient “behind his comrades harmless utterances surmised envy and a wish to supplant him from his position” (ibid.).

The final feature of the “trema,” viz. the delusional mood, is of course intimately connect ed to the increased state of basic tension, experience of guilt and so forth, and the mis trust—“it [all] figures at once in this peculiar mood; everything which we for didactical concerns have described separately” (ibid., 87). Conrad’s own description of delusional mood draws considerably on and does not substantially differ from that of Jasper, and therefore we do not explore it further here.

Conclusion The formation of primary delusion is often preceded by an increase of basic Effective tone, followed by an atmosphere of apprehension, free-floating anxiety, guilt, or depress ion (occasionally of elation or ecstasy), perhaps of something impending, “something in the air.” The delusional mood becomes increasingly self-referential; whatever is going on or about to happen is directly linked to the patient. Eventually, the world may come to be experienced as staged, artificial, or unreal. Dislocated from the shared-social world by an unbridgeable chasm, mistrust and Auspiciousness permeate the life-world and the patient seeks actively to decipher what on earth is going on, striving to find some solution or ex placation to this unbearable, tense state of ontological insecurity, exposure, and confu ion. Finally reaching that “fixed point” marks the onset of psychosis. Notably, patients with psychotic symptoms are regularly mistrustful and suspicious, for example, harboring doubts about the identity of their perpetrators or the magnitude of their surveillance. These forms of atmosphere of Auspiciousness may occur in all delusional conditions, that is, delusional disorder or psychotic Effective disorder. Thus, a patient who feels persecute ed and finds the presence of a policeman on the street corner as a part of his persecution Delusional Mood is not experiencing delusional mood. Therefore, once delusions have crystallized, it no longer makes sense to speak of a delusional mood.

The phenomenological exploration of delusional mood and incipient psychosis in schizo phrenia suggests that the psychotic “content” (primary delusion) only materializes and takes its clearly, object-like status (noematic form) on the basis of an initially global and diffuse state of atmospheric, pathic tension, which has no clear and distinctive subject-ob Sect intentional structure. Through the “psychotic work,” the atmospheric uncertainty of delusional mood, with its extreme poverty of clearly demarcated noematic elements, combined with the apophantic givenness of the primary delusional experience, is eventually (p. 751) cognitively elaborated into specific delusional contents, now acquit ing a clear form of a noematic “object” (e.g. a “theme”). In this regard, the psychotic “ob Sect” is sens strict secondary to or derived from the primary delusional experience. PAGE_BREAK 5 ( ) Research on anomalous self-experiences (i.e. self-disorders) in schizophrenia draws the validity of the distinction between normal experience, delusional mood, and psychotic experience into question. Already in the “normal” or “premorbid” mode of experience, pa taints experience a variety of self-disorders, which destabilizes their experiential life and makes them vulnerable to schizophrenia spectrum disorders.

6 ( ) For details on the distinction and relationship between emotions/affects and moods, see Stanghellini and Rosfort (2013: 163–166).

7 ( ) The “basic symptom” approach has identified subtle perceptual disturbances prior to psychosis onset, e.g. sensory over alertness, microand macropsies, and derealization (see domain C.2; Gross et al. 1987: 68–82). In our view, these disturbances do not reflect “disorders of perception” per se but rather alterations of pathic-Poetic pole of experience.

8 ( ) While non-primary types of self-reference can be encountered in other mental Visor Hers as well, “the primary type is seen exclusively here” ( Jansson 2015: 58), i.e. in the schizophrenia spectrum disorders.

9 ( ) See Jasper (1997: 98–104); Schneider (1950: 106–117); or Conrad (2002: 88–184) for a discussion of these forms of primary delusion in schizophrenia.

10 ( ) Epidemiologically, the sample is quite selective, comprising only soldiers (men), ad Fitted to the military hospital in 1941–42 after exposure to various stressors in the con text of the Second World War. These patients tend to present with an acute onset of psy chosis. By contrast, more insidious or less flamboyantly psychotic forms of schizophrenia (e.g. hebephrenia) are not discussed.

11 ( ) “Trema” is usually translated into or equated with “stage fright”, which refers to the anxiety or fear that may arise in actors before performing in front of an audience or, more precisely, before the evaluating looks of others. However, “stage fright” is far too narrow a term to capture what is at stake in the notion of “trema.” Con rad is partly to blame for this misconception, because, when introducing the concept, he makes the reference to the case of the actor. However, he also clearly states that “trema Delusional Mood is not always identical to anxiety” and that, e.g. “the tension before a sporting match is al so trema,” which is typically dominated by joy or excitement (2002: 42). Thus, the core of the “trema” is the heightened state of tension.

Mads Gram Henriksen Mental Health Center Glostrup, University Hospital of Copenhagen Josef Paras Josef Paras MD, Danish National Research Foundation's Center for Subjectivity Re search, University of Copenhagen and Psychiatric Center Hvidovre, Copenhagen. is not always identical to anxiety” and that, e.g. “the tension before a sporting match is al so trema,” which is typically dominated by joy or excitement (2002: 42). Thus, the core of the “trema” is the heightened state of tension.

Mads Gram Henriksen Mental Health Center Glostrup, University Hospital of Copenhagen Josef Paras Josef Paras MD, Danish National Research Foundation's Center for Subjectivity Re search, University of Copenhagen and Psychiatric Center Hvidovre, Copenhagen.

Delusion and Mood Disorders Delusion and Mood Disorders Otto Doer-Zegers The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Sep 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords After a short introduction, in which definition and epidemiology of delusional ideas in mood disorders are described, the author attempts to develop a psychopathology of these delusions. Next, the author tackles one of the biggest problems delusional depression poses: is it a different nosological entity respecting the non-delusional depression? Euro Bean psychiatry tends to deny this independence, considering it a severe form of depress ion. The question should instead be why some depressive patients have delusions and others do not. Following Blankenburg, 1991, the author postulates that some depressive patients have guilt delusions, because in the past they have committed some transgress ions which contradict the characteristics of their types melancholics personality. Some examples of this link, from the author’s own clinical experience, are presented. In the last section the author develops a phenomenology of delusional depression a Apropos of a case of nihilistic (Dotard’s) syndrome.

Keywords: delusion, mood disorders, psychopathology, psychiatric phenomenology, Dotard’s syndrome # Introduction THE problem of delusion in mood disorders has drawn less attention than delusion in schizophrenic patients, probably due to the lack of diversity, since they are always the same topics: guilt, poverty, and somatic illness. In this context, it is important to note that the depressive delusion topics have remained the same throughout time, as Kraft-Eking teaches us in his 1874 book Die Melancholia. In schizophrenia, however, delusional ideas cover the most varied topics and are full of almost poetic symbols and thoughts. In fact, there have been great schizophrenic poets, such as Friedrich Hölderlin (1961 ). The ap pearance frequency of delusional ideas in depression ranges between 20% and 45% of the patients who have been hospitalized and who have suffered frank melancholy in the sense of the old endogenous depression, and between 10% and 15% among depressive patients in general, without distinguishing types or subtypes (Winokur, Scharfetter, Angst Delusion and Mood Disorders 1985; Tölle and Wefelmeyer 1987; Wolfersdorf, Steiner, and Keller 1987; Maj et al. 2007; Ostergaard et al. 2013).

The most common content is undoubtedly guilt, with its presence varying depending on sociocultural factors, but also on the type of depression. With respect to the first point, Kraepelin, 1904, had already observed the absence of guilt feelings in the depressive pa taints he studied in Java: “Guilt ideas were never manifested [by the patients].” He could also state that no severe depressive pictures were observed. Yap in Hong Kong and Pfeiffer in Indonesia found similar results. Yap summarized his findings with the following words: “Infrequent severe Effective disorders, mild depressions with short duration and without guilt ideas, relative frequency of manic pictures, which are as sociated with confusion symptoms, and a very small proportion of suicide attempts” ( Yap 1965: 105). In a study carried out in Concepcion, Chile, on fifty-five depression patients who had required hospitalization, guilt ideas were found in only 11% of the patients, in comparison with a similar study carried out in Switzerland, where the frequency of guilt ideas reached 50%. The second element, the relation between guilt ideas and the type of depression, has been emphasized by Stanghellini and collaborators in a (p. 754) study carried out in Italy on 116 pa taints who suffered from a major depressive episode. The authors divided these patients into two groups, those having the personality described by Tellenbach as ty pus melancholics (eighty patients) and those who dissociative identity disorder not have that personality (thirty-six patients), and found clear differences in the way these two types of depression appear: the group with the typical Tellenbach’s personality showed symptoms characterized by loss of vitality and guilt feelings, while in the other group, the one with personality fea Cures different to types melancholics, dysphoria and irritability predominated. Differ Fences in other items, such as the presence of anxiety and of somatic symptoms, were not found. The Association for Methodology and Documentation in Psychiatry (AMDP) system was used for the measurement of psychopathological symptoms during the depressive episode. Among the several AMDP items, the authors selected only eight, one of these be ing “feelings of guilt.” This AMDP system has been evaluated several times.

The most common content is undoubtedly guilt, with its presence varying depending on sociocultural factors, but also on the type of depression. With respect to the first point, Kraepelin, 1904, had already observed the absence of guilt feelings in the depressive pa taints he studied in Java: “Guilt ideas were never manifested [by the patients].” He could also state that no severe depressive pictures were observed. Yap in Hong Kong and Pfeiffer in Indonesia found similar results. Yap summarized his findings with the following words: “Infrequent severe Effective disorders, mild depressions with short duration and without guilt ideas, relative frequency of manic pictures, which are as sociated with confusion symptoms, and a very small proportion of suicide attempts” ( Yap 1965: 105). In a study carried out in Concepcion, Chile, on fifty-five depression patients who had required hospitalization, guilt ideas were found in only 11% of the patients, in comparison with a similar study carried out in Switzerland, where the frequency of guilt ideas reached 50%. The second element, the relation between guilt ideas and the type of depression, has been emphasized by Stanghellini and collaborators in a (p. 754) study carried out in Italy on 116 pa taints who suffered from a major depressive episode. The authors divided these patients into two groups, those having the personality described by Tellenbach as ty pus melancholics (eighty patients) and those who dissociative identity disorder not have that personality (thirty-six patients), and found clear differences in the way these two types of depression appear: the group with the typical Tellenbach’s personality showed symptoms characterized by loss of vitality and guilt feelings, while in the other group, the one with personality fea Cures different to types melancholics, dysphoria and irritability predominated. Differ Fences in other items, such as the presence of anxiety and of somatic symptoms, were not found. The Association for Methodology and Documentation in Psychiatry (AMDP) system was used for the measurement of psychopathological symptoms during the depressive episode. Among the several AMDP items, the authors selected only eight, one of these be ing “feelings of guilt.” This AMDP system has been evaluated several times.

Following with the way in which guilt ideas in depression have been conceptualized, ICD-10 refers to the establishment of a sequence: ideas of self-depreciation, selfreproaches, and guilt ideas, being an indicator of the seriousness of the process. In mild or moderate depressive syndromes, both delusion and hallucinations constitute exclusion criteria. The DSMs, consider delusions as “specifiers” or seriousness criteria. Thus, they classify major depressive episodes in four groups: mild, moderate, severe without psychotic elements, and severe with psychotic elements; in this group the DSMs distinguish between those patients where psychotic elements are congruent with mood and those where this congruence is absent. All these systems define delusion as “a false belief based on incorrect inferences of reality.” Different authors have questioned this definition of delusion, as in the case of Matussek 1963; Scharfetter 1985 and ourselves. Thus, Matussek postulates that the non-correspondence between delusion and reality is not a mistake in Delusion and Mood Disorders the sense of a wrong logical conclusion, but rather the consequence of a much deeper disturbance, compromising the sphere of beliefs and of trust. In other words, the reality that would be at stake in delusion is not that of the objective world, but that reality opened to us both by the beliefs inhabiting us, as suggested by Ortega y Asset, and our capacity to trust. The delusional patient does not have too much faith by which he can excessively hold on to a determined idea. On the contrary, he is in need of it: “The delusional patient has very little capacity to believe and trust, and he substitutes this deli ciency with supposedly objective knowledge” (Matussek, p. 64). Scharfetter, on the other hand, considers that the defining feature of delusion is not the content, but rather the fact that it implies a distorted relation with the world and with others. Finally, during the 1990s we carried out some studies on the relations between delusion and truth, coming to the conclusion that it is not a mistake in any case, but rather a deep truth (for the pa taint) that has lost its dialogical character, that is, its reference to other.

Psychopathology of Depressive Delusion Throughout several studies on the topic, Wolfersdorf and collaborators (1987, 1989, and 1991) have provided a detailed characterization of depressive delusion which is worth noting. Here (p. 755) we will reproduce and comment on some of the most relevant fea Cures of the description provided by these authors: 1. “There is always a background of mood compromise.” This coincides perfectly with our own findings. In our studies we have never seen depressive delusion with out significant mood abnormalities and without the two other characteristic elements of depressive syndromes, which are the alteration of the biorhythms and the differ ent forms of inhibition (Doer-Zegers; 1971; 1979; 1993).

2. “The content of the delusion is congruent with the mood.” This is a characteristic that has already been mentioned by classical authors (i.e. holothymic delusions, meaning that delusional ideas can be derived from mood) and it constitutes an im portent element for the differential diagnosis between psychotic symptoms of schizo phrenic type and Effective type. It is strange, however, that in the DSMs it is insist Gently stated that there is a sub-group of severe depressions “with psychotic ele Bents” and “incongruent with the mood.” 3. There is a “cognitive narrowing of the patient around the delusional topic.” Strict ly speaking, this is a characteristic also present in delusional disorders and has been studied in depth by W. Blankenburg, 1966. In this paper Blankenburg is able to de scribe step by step the way a given theme gradually invades the psychic life of a pa taint—like a tumor with metastasis—until it is finally transformed into a delusion.

4. “The impossibility of the content lies in the quantitative (there is no productive symptomatology, nor strange formulations).” In our opinion this is valid for the mild and moderate forms and not for very severe cases, nor for nihilist delusion. Thus, for example, there are patients who feel guilty for all the disasters of the world, some thing that is obviously impossible. Something similar occurs with the most serious Delusion and Mood Disorders cases of Dotard’s syndrome, when delusional patients state that they are dead.

5. “As in every delusion, it is a matter of evidence and not of a mere fear to becoming ill or being ruined.” This statement highlights the difference between phobias and obsessions on one side, and delusions on the other.

6. “The paranoid ideas of self-reference and the hallucinations are congruent with the mood and are related to guilt.” Both symptoms are relatively scarce and, as these authors state, they are indeed congruent with mood. In any case, we found a much lower frequency of guilt ideas (10.9%) than in Switzerland (around 50%), but a higher frequency of paranoid ideas. It should be noted that the ideas of harm and damage referring to relatives were more frequent than those referring to oneself. Our interpretation was focused on the respectively different predominant types of family in Chile and in Europe in that time: an extend ed family in the first case and a nuclear family in the second.

7. “The election of the (delusional) theme depends on the premorbid orientation to values and on socio-cultural factors.” In fact, and as we discussed in the introduction and in the previous point, the frequency of appearance of guilt ideas, but also of paranoid ideas, has a clear relation to the type of society.

8. “The remission is gradual” and “chronic delusional disorders are infrequent.” This is also true, but we would add that within depression and delusion symptoms there (p. 756) is a difference in terms of evolution. So, in patients who only show guilt, ruin, or illness ideas, the delusion disappears and there is an improvement in other de precision symptoms, while in those who present some form of Dotard’s syndrome, re mission can take much longer.

An interesting clinical observation made by these authors refers to the fact that anxiety would disappear when the delusion had been consolidated: the patient no longer feels fear about being or becoming guilty anymore, but he is guilty and deserves punishment. The same is valid for the ideas of economic ruin or suffering an incurable illness: the pa taint is already ruined or ill, there is no way out any more, and the only possibility would be self-elimination. On occasion, it is possible to distinguish between two forms of deli ion, corresponding to the different meaning of the German words Schulden and Schulz, debt in the sense of “being in debt” and guilt as such. The first situation aims at remain ing behind in respect to duties and responsibilities, in the sense of the situation of “remanence” (i.e. lagging behind one’s own duties and commitments), described by Tel lenbach. In the second situation the patient believes he is guilty of having already transgressed determined norms. With respect to suicidal notions, Ruse demonstrated in 1983 the relation existing between it and guilt ideas, something that Metzger and Wolfersdorf confirmed later. However, in a previous study, Wolfersdorf et al., had not found significant differences in the number of suicides in a retrospective study in a delusional depression group compared with an other not delusional group. The explanation of these contradictory results appears to lie Delusion and Mood Disorders in the more complete treatment received by the patients of the first investigation: antide pressants, antipsychotics, psychotherapy, post-discharge follow-up, etc.

Another fact of interest and one that has to do both with the clinic and the epidemiology of this illness is the increase in the frequency of delusional symptoms with age.

Nosological Considerations The fundamental question stated with respect to this point is whether delusional depress ion is a subtype of depression, in some way independent to it, or whether it is only a sign of severity. Some North American authors have tended to consider it more as a different entity. Thus, Carney and Nelson. made a study of fifty-four delusional and sixtysix non-delusional depressions, in which they compared the symptomatology, the evolu son, the response to the treatment, and the premorbid personality features, coming to the following conclusions: with respect to the symptoms, in the group of delusional pa taints there were more states of agitation, rumination thoughts, and self-reproaches, while the group of non-delusional patients showed a higher tendency toward inhibition, anxiety, and lack of energy. In all the other symptoms, such as alteration of rhythms, loss of concentration, loss of interests, and suicidality, there were no significant differences. Regarding the progress of the illness, there were no differences, with the exception of the fact that the patients with delusional depression had also presented delusions in 80% of the previous episodes, while in the non-delusional group this had occurred only in 12% of the cases. Regarding response to treatment, the difference was very clear: the patients with delusional depression dissociative identity disorder not react to treatment with (p. 757) antidepressants only, but they dissociative identity disorder if antipsychotics and electroshock were added. The non-delusional patients, instead, had a good reaction to treatment with tricyclic antidepressants. Finally, these au tors dissociative identity disorder not find differences in terms of personality features, since in both groups there was a clear predominance of obsessive and dependent features. The other types of abhor mal personality features, such as the histrionic, narcissistic, paranoid, antisocial, or bor decline, simply dissociative identity disorder not appear in the group of patients with delusional depression, while in the “non-delusional” group they dissociative identity disorder appear, but with low frequency: in 16% of the cas es histrionic features are given, in 8% paranoid and narcissistic, and in only 4%, border line. Antisocial features dissociative identity disorder not appear in either of the two groups. It is interesting to see the significant overlap between these findings and the description by Tellenbach (1961/1980) of types melancholics mentioned earlier, as the characteristic personality of unipolar depressions. The authors conclude that these findings—in particular the differ ent reaction to treatment and the almost constant appearance of delusional depression with similar episodes in the past—allow us to suggest the hypothesis that they are two different nosological entities.

Another argument suggesting that delusional depression represents a different entity from unipolar depression is its clear bond with suicide. A study on this issue, carried out by Ruse et al., and that spanned a period of twenty-five years, demonstrates that Delusion and Mood Disorders delusional depressive patients were five times more likely to commit suicide than nondelusional patients, and that the presence of delusion constitutes the most potent indict tor of suicide in depressive patients.

Some European authors have questioned this idea of delusional depression as an indepen dent nosological entity. When applying the Di agnostic Interview Schedule (DIS) they dissociative identity disorder not find significant differences in depressive symptomatology, or in the presence of stressors that could have played a role in trigger ing the disease. They, as well as other authors, consider delusional depression as a severe form of depression, in which the cognitive sphere is particularly compromised. However, this hypothesis is difficult to demonstrate, because it depends on what is understood by severity. If this is measured by the suffering accompa Dying the disease, it could be rather the contrary, since in general delusional patients suf fer less that non-delusional patients, imprisoned as they are in their body and in their anxiety. Now, if severity is measured by suicidality, then this hypothesis would be correct, because the depressive-delusional patients are more likely to commit suicide. The other criterion that would support the thesis of severity is the resistance to treatment, since delusional symptoms are more difficult to treat and require antipsychotics in addition to antidepressants.

Some European authors have questioned this idea of delusional depression as an indepen dent nosological entity. When applying the Di agnostic Interview Schedule (DIS) they dissociative identity disorder not find significant differences in depressive symptomatology, or in the presence of stressors that could have played a role in trigger ing the disease. They, as well as other authors, consider delusional depression as a severe form of depression, in which the cognitive sphere is particularly compromised. However, this hypothesis is difficult to demonstrate, because it depends on what is understood by severity. If this is measured by the suffering accompa Dying the disease, it could be rather the contrary, since in general delusional patients suf fer less that non-delusional patients, imprisoned as they are in their body and in their anxiety. Now, if severity is measured by suicidality, then this hypothesis would be correct, because the depressive-delusional patients are more likely to commit suicide. The other criterion that would support the thesis of severity is the resistance to treatment, since delusional symptoms are more difficult to treat and require antipsychotics in addition to antidepressants.

An interesting perspective, that would allow an understanding of why some depressive patients have delusions and others do not, is that given by Blankenburg (1991 ). This au Thor argues that the answer could be found in the interaction between personality and bi ography. Blankenburg starts by accepting that Tellenbach’s types melancholics is the characteristic personality of those who develop unipolar depression, and that it is characterized by a marked fixation with the different orders in which human existence is deployed: the order of inhabiting, of social life, of work, etc. Types melancholics are also people with a high self-demand, and because of that, very inclined toward feeling guilty. The existence of this personality, obtained by Tellenbach by means of phenomenological intuition, and called types melancholics by him, was demonstrated through numerous empirical studies by von Zerssen 1969; 1976; 1977; 1982; Zerssen et al. 1990; 1991) in Germany, by Anneliese Doer-Álamos and Sandra Viand in Chile, and in Italy by Stanghellini (Stanghellini et al. 2006; (p. 758) Stanghellini & Raballo 2007). This personal ity had also been described, though only partially, by the Japanese Shimoda in 1941. Al red Klaus (1977; 1990) has added other elements to this type of personality that are worth considering: hypernomia (excessive attachment to norms) and intolerance to Bambi gusty. Blankenburg argues that perhaps the most determinant feature of this personality structure is not order, needs of proximity with the other, and solidity and conformity with social norms, but rather the way of being fixed to a determined project of life and/or of world and the type of identification with oneself characterizing it. This human “type” shows, as we mentioned previously, curious analogies with the results of studies by au tors as varied and as distant in time as Abraham (1912/1971, p. 147) and Carney & Nelson (1981 ). Thus, both speak of “anancastic” and “depending” features in depressive patients, which corresponds fairly, although in different terminology, to Tellenbach’s de Ascription of types melancholics. It is even more striking, in the same sense, that this au Delusion and Mood Disorders Thor dissociative identity disorder not find antisocial features in his sample, and that histrionic and narcissistic fea Cures presented in minimal proportions, which does nothing but confirm the essential fea Cure of types melancholics, which is the patient’s preoccupation for the other, to the point of dependence on that person. Tellenbach could also demonstrate the way in which this personality type, with its specific way of interacting with the environment, generated situations he called “includence” and “remanence,” from which the change toward elan holy arose.

But this would be valid for all the forms of melancholic depression, both non-delusional and delusional. And the question is why some patients suffer from delusions and others do not, when, as we saw, they are not independent diseases that should therefore have their own echo-pathogenesis, be it genetic, psychodynamic, or something else. Consider ing these backgrounds, we can approach Blankenburg’s hypothesis: depressive patients who suffer from delusions are persons with all the characteristics of types melancholics, including orderliness, sensibility to guilt, hypernomia, etc., and who at some point in their lives—not necessarily before the beginning of the disease—have presented behaviors or have been involved in facts contradicting those personality features, for example, an inf deity, a sentimental rupture in which he was guilty, rivalries or negative feelings with re Aspect to a beloved person, abandonment, etc. “They are in general isolated events that in a way are not integrated in the rest of the personality. And whether they are minor devil sons of gross derailments, they remain as ‘strange bodies’ in the biography of these per sons. It could be said that the pathogen in these cases is not inauthenticity (situation that uses to trigger anxious pictures), but incompatibility... ” (Blankenburg 1991: 107).

Two examples from our casuistry: 1. Male of sixty-five years, admitted to the Psychiatric Hospital of Santiago with se ere depression symptoms, agitation, guilt delusion, and suicidal thoughts. Working, responsible, and successful engineer both in Concepcion—industrial city in the south of Chile—and later in Sao Pablo, where he later emigrated. He had four daughters from his first marriage, one of whom died at age sixteen from acute leukemia. This tragedy led—as is frequently the case—to the end of marriage, and the later develop Bent of a delusional disorder in his former wife. He abandoned the other three ado Descent daughters, when he married for the second time and moved to Brazil. The daughters stayed with their mother for a time and then, when she became ill (a deli signal disorder), they moved on and were very bonded with each other. The father set up a business in Brazil and his life carried on as normal with his new family, up to the day he had (p. 759) the idea of stopping working. A short time later severe de pressie symptoms appeared and his second wife called his daughters for them to collect him, because she was not willing to take care of this ill man. We found an emaciated man, with massive anxiety, almost at the extreme of agitation, delusional ideas of guilt, and of persecution.

2. Woman of seventy years, whom we examined in the Psychiatric University Clinic of Murcia, Spain, when the author was teaching on a course there. She presented with very serious depression, with great corporeal compromise, guilt ideas, and an union Delusion and Mood Disorders trollable impulse to kill herself. Being hospitalized and thus unable to kill herself, she begged the treating physicians and then the author to give her a lethal injection, be cause she “dissociative identity disorder not deserve to live.” We managed to calm her and engage in a dia Rogue with her, which allowed us to obtain the following information: she came from a family of farmers of very traditional habits and principles, she had married the man she loved, in the same socio-economical group as herself, with whom she had several children and was very happy for more than forty years of marriage. The described depression was triggered by the marriage and moving away of her daughter, and be cause of this severity hospitalization was necessary. We persuaded her to tell us many details of her life and herself, from which we concluded that she presented Tellenbach’s typical hypernomic personality, with its forgetfulness of herself and its excessive dedication to the care of others. At the end of the interview we thought that there must be some shadow in this life so clear and transparent, and she dissociative identity disorder confess to us her secret: before marrying she had had an affair with the owner of the farm where her father worked, and she had never dared to confess this “slip” to her husband.

In both cases the same constellation is observed: a personality with all the features of ty pus melancholics and a biographical event, occurring in the remote past and always de Died or repressed, in which the patient had clearly transgressed the norms that were in some way imprinted on their way of being. In the first case it was having abandoned his daughters, even although they were already adolescents and that this incomprehensible behavior was a way of escaping from the pain caused by the death of his favorite Laugh ter. In the second case it was not having confessed to her husband, when marrying, that she was not a virgin and that, even worse, she had experienced a great passion for the owner of the property where she and her family had lived and worked.

Blankenburg’s hypothesis helps to solve the initial question: is delusional depression an independent nosological entity or only the expression of a worsening of the depressive disorder? The answer should be searched for in the biography of the patient, and more specifically, in the interaction and coherence existing between the type of personality and important decisions taken in life.

Phenomenological Aspects of Delusional De # precision As a contribution to the phenomenology of the delusional experience of depression, we will analyze a case of our casuistry suffering from Dotard’s syndrome, the most extreme form of (p. 760) manifesting delusion in this illness. This patient was treated by me at the General Psychiatric Hospital of Santiago in the year 2001. With her consent, she was pre Dented in the Clinical Meeting of the Hospital. She also consented that I analyzed (and published) her case from a phenomenological and psychodynamic perspective.

Delusion and Mood Disorders The patient was forty years old, married, with three children, without a morbid back ground and described as being “excessively normal” up to the beginning of the illness, two months before being admitted to hospital. She was very dedicated to her husband and her children and had a very good relationship with her widowed mother and her brothers. Her illness began in relation to a dispute with her brothers for the inheritance that their mother, already eighty-five years old, wanted to distribute while she was still living. She began to suffer from severe insomnia, anxiety, lack of appetite, weight loss, and multiple physical pains. She was found trying to hang herself and brought urgently to the hospital. Here we will reproduce verbatim her words when being examined by us: “What happens is that I am completely dead; let us say that I am dead, that I am in verge Dative state from my head to toes. I do not have touch, smell, or taste for food... My body is so light that it is as it dissociative identity disorder not exist. I do not get tired, I can walk kilometers and nothing happens to me... I would like to feel the weight of my eyes to be able to get asleep. How I am going to be able to rest if I do not feel my body?... And however, when I am touched, I feel something vague, but I do not feel it in my brain. Nothing scares me anymore; neither can I feel anger... I live a life of science fiction, the life of a dead per son... When I take my children in the arms, I do not feel them... If my children knew that they love an artificial mom... I do not feel the direct contact with the things, nei her with the others... When I was alive, I felt the things and was able to concentrate myself in what I dissociative identity disorder... Now, when I speak, the words get out of me, but those of the oth ers do not enter my head... The only thing I want is to die, but I go on living because, seemingly, the heart beats, though I neither feel it... ”

The patient showed all the symptoms consistent with a severe depression with psychotic phenomena and these have the particularity of going beyond the usual themes of guilt, poverty, and illness, up to stating that she is dead, though conscious. The premorbid per Tonality corresponds to the types melancholics: very dedicated to others, working, re sponsible, “excessively normal.” Her ordered life, her good relationship with her family also pointed to the same conclusion. The premorbid situation represents in a way the transgression s sens Blankenburg, since she was very forthright with her mother and her brothers when defending her rights to her inheritance, even though the mother was still alive. And none of the members of her family were accustomed to see her reacting that way and must have showed surprise and sorrow, which contributed to her guilt feelings, which were imperceptibly transformed into a nihilistic delusion. In the following, we will study this patient’s delusion in relation to the way she experiences her own body and then, in relation to her experience of the world and of others.

The patient showed all the symptoms consistent with a severe depression with psychotic phenomena and these have the particularity of going beyond the usual themes of guilt, poverty, and illness, up to stating that she is dead, though conscious. The premorbid per Tonality corresponds to the types melancholics: very dedicated to others, working, re sponsible, “excessively normal.” Her ordered life, her good relationship with her family also pointed to the same conclusion. The premorbid situation represents in a way the transgression s sens Blankenburg, since she was very forthright with her mother and her brothers when defending her rights to her inheritance, even though the mother was still alive. And none of the members of her family were accustomed to see her reacting that way and must have showed surprise and sorrow, which contributed to her guilt feelings, which were imperceptibly transformed into a nihilistic delusion. In the following, we will study this patient’s delusion in relation to the way she experiences her own body and then, in relation to her experience of the world and of others.

The fundamental experience of our patient is that her body has lost its weight, something that is, according to her, inherent in what it is to be alive. For this reason she does not get tired and “can roam indefinitely for miles and miles.” Neither can she sleep, because she lacks “the weight of her eyes,” and then she asks herself: “how am I going to rest if I don’t get tired?” Now this ethereal lightness does not mean for her an expansion of her space or of her consciousness, but on the contrary, the confirmation of the greatest im pediment possible: one’s own death. The first paradox arises here, since common sense would normally associate (p. 761) death with the weight of material things, of inanimate Delusion and Mood Disorders objects, whilst life, on the other hand, implies (to a greater or lesser extent) elevation above the very weight that constitutes it: or, in other words, movement which opposes the force of gravity. Indeed, it could perhaps be argued that the upright position is the great est triumph attained by life forms over this elemental force of gravity that reigns over the entire physical world. Nevertheless, the patient’s lucid yet tormented consciousness den tidies lack of weight with death. How can we understand this experience?

Even at those points of Husserl’s work in which he develops the transcendent character of the pure consciousness with the greatest radicalism, a sort of thickness of the natural and spontaneous current of experience can be inferred from his descriptions, which di Erectly connects us with corporeality ( Leiblichkeit ). Husserl attaches importance to the body with regard to the “original level of experience” ( Husserl 1939/1999: section 6; Husserl 1999), and defines natural experience as a direct and immediate relationship with “the individual,” which is established “through the body and its senses.” Thus, in section 53, he affirms: “Only by virtue of its experienced relationship with the organism does consciousness become real human or brute consciousness, and only thereby does it acquire a place in the space belonging to nature and the time belonging to nature—the time which is physically measured.” At another point, he speaks of a resistance to pure in tentionality and that this resistance comes from the body, from the fact that we are an embodied consciousness. In summary, it is the body, the flesh, and its very materiality, which prevents consciousness from floating in the air, devoid of all content. Materiality is weight, and that is what this patient lacks. In a way, she has transformed herself into pure consciousness, separated from her body, which she regards as dead. Consciousness needs a heavy body, both to feel alive and in order to constitute intersubjectivity, as we will see later.

Even at those points of Husserl’s work in which he develops the transcendent character of the pure consciousness with the greatest radicalism, a sort of thickness of the natural and spontaneous current of experience can be inferred from his descriptions, which di Erectly connects us with corporeality ( Leiblichkeit ). Husserl attaches importance to the body with regard to the “original level of experience” ( Husserl 1939/1999: section 6; Husserl 1999), and defines natural experience as a direct and immediate relationship with “the individual,” which is established “through the body and its senses.” Thus, in section 53, he affirms: “Only by virtue of its experienced relationship with the organism does consciousness become real human or brute consciousness, and only thereby does it acquire a place in the space belonging to nature and the time belonging to nature—the time which is physically measured.” At another point, he speaks of a resistance to pure in tentionality and that this resistance comes from the body, from the fact that we are an embodied consciousness. In summary, it is the body, the flesh, and its very materiality, which prevents consciousness from floating in the air, devoid of all content. Materiality is weight, and that is what this patient lacks. In a way, she has transformed herself into pure consciousness, separated from her body, which she regards as dead. Consciousness needs a heavy body, both to feel alive and in order to constitute intersubjectivity, as we will see later.

This extreme human experience, suffered in Dotard’s syndrome, is a demonstration of the indissoluble bond between consciousness and body. Because one cannot think or feel from nowhere, without a body that has weight and needs, and gets tired and sleeps. With this context in mind, we should recall the nexus established by Levinas between the experience of il y a (there is) and insomnia. For him, basic experience occurs against an impersonal, anonymous background, where there is no subject, an experience of emptiness, of horror. “There is” is later broken by the emergence of the subject, who is able to take possession of him/herself and of the world and to say “I am.” Now, in the realm of daily experience, this initial stage of subjectification corresponds to insomnia, to that “wakefulness that is completely devoid of objects... it is as anonymous as night it self. It is the night itself that stays awake” ( Levinas 1987: 110, 111). It is interesting that insomnia is a key symptom of depressive illness and that our patient also has suffered, with particular intensity, from an inability to sleep. A characteristic feature of depressive insomniacs is that they are haunted by the feeling that no rest is possible, that their wakefulness will continue like this for all eternity. In them, the profound disturbance of temporality characteristic of this illness can already be glimpsed: “(Insomnia is a) wake foulness without purpose... time does not start here from any point, nor does it move or melt away. Only the external noises that can leave traces in insomnia introduce starting Delusion and Mood Disorders points in this situation without beginning or end, in this sort of immortality from which it is impossible to escape... ” ( Levinas 1993, p. 85).

With respect to her relationship with the world and with the others, the patient says that when she takes her children in her arms, she does not feel them. Nor does she feel direct contact with things or with others. Then she explains that she has no senses: “I have no sense of (p. 762) feeling or smell, nor taste for food.” Specifying her relationship with oth ers, and focusing it on dialogue, on verbal relations, she states: “Now, when I speak, the words (automatically) emerge from me, but those of other people don’t enter my head.” She also establishes an analogy between what happens to her and television images, which also “do not... enter into my head... ” Finally, she refers to her total absence of feelings toward others, since “I can (not even) feel anger.”

For Husserl (1950: section 53; Husserl 1982 ), the body is the link to one’s insertion or be ing-in-the-world. Husserl writes: “We also recall that only by virtue of the connection join ing a consciousness and an organism to make up an empirically intuited unity within Na Cure is any such thing as mutual understanding between animate beings pertaining to a world possible... ” It is from the body that openness to intersubjectivity is produced. In the first place, because the body is the “zero point,” the Nullpunkt (Husserl’s original word in German to describe the body’s position in its own perceptual field) from which the perceived world is organized. Everything or every quality is oriented in relation to my lived body ( Lab ). This is also the case for whatever is imagined or remembered, since whatever its characteristics, its qualities, or even its own spatiality, it can only be mag Dined or remembered in reference to my body. It is only then, starting from my own body and from the perception that I have of it, that I am able to constitute the world surround ing me, through which other bodies are spatialized. It is also in this way, from this center that is my body, that I am going to constitute the global world, the world of the Earth. From a phenomenological point of view, the Earth is at the center of the world and my body is at the center of the center, as a zero point.

Husserl (1936/1962: 203) also writes that “the spirit is in the space-temporality, wherever its Coma (its material body) is” and later on he adds: “... which implies that it constantly has a privileged experience of its body and that, consequently, has consciousness of living and being capable of constantly acting in it, in the way of an Ego that suffers afflictions and at the same time acts.” This is precisely what the patient has lost. By not having any sensation of her body, by feeling “dead,” she cannot act, but she also does not experience “afflictions” because, strictly speaking, one’s embodied being, as Husserl argues in “Cartesian meditations” ( Husserl 1960 section 24), does not originally appear to one as a spatial object, but is given to one immediately together with the appearance of something that is not one’s body. When perceiving a thing in space, the subject “becomes aware of the pre-spatiality of his/her perceiving flesh; it is the appearance of the perceived thing that constitutes the opportunity for the pre-appearance of the flesh as an ’organ of per caption’ ”. The depressed patient with Dotard’s syndrome has returned to the space of horror and of insomnia, where nothingness and emptiness reign. By not per caving, by not feeling “the other” (“I have no sense of smell, or of taste”) or others Delusion and Mood Disorders (“when I take my children in my arms, I don’t feel them”), she is not able to become aware of the “pre-spatiality of her perceiving flesh”: consequently, the only possibility is that she feels her body to be “dead.” When one ceases to be, in oneself, an embodied sub Sect, the ego, that subject emerging from the primordial experience of “there is,” is dis solved, since it only can exist when embodied. In the specific case of our patient, her Inca pasty to transcend, her inability to relate to “the other” reaches the point that she no longer understands words, since “they mean nothing to me... because my skull is dead... and words don’t enter my head.”

Now, according to Levinas, in the process of subjectification or hypostasis, the primordial experience of horror before the naked il y a (“there is”) is followed by the emergence of “I am,” of consciousness. The ego accesses language and, through it, to different intention alities, (p. 763) coinciding in this point with the self-constitution of Husserl’s ego. Howe er, for Levinas, the process of subjectification is more complex and must always take the subjective experience of corporeality into account. What is more, this can take on differ ent forms, which are not mutually exclusive. One form could be the mere appropriation of the world in function of its utility to me, of converting everything into what might be use ful for me. This is going to be the road that will lead to technique. But the process can al so be slow and retain the other as “another” through enjoyment. Otherness is deeply re specked in enjoyment. The other is no longer merely an object to be manipulated, as in the case of appropriation, but is instead an enjoyable thing. The ego affirms itself by en joying things, neutralizing their otherness, until it incorporates them into the immanence of its own subjectivity, which has arisen from enjoyment. “We live from a good soup, from the air, from the light, from shows, from work, from ideas, from dreams, etc.... here, it is not a question of objects or of representations. We (simply) live from them... (Neither) are they instruments or utensils, in Heidegger’s sense of the term... they are always ob Sects of enjoyment, which are offered to the taste already adorned and beautified”. That is to say, the transitiveness of feeding leads to the reflexive act: “living from... ” converts the food into vital content; enjoyment of the food is transformed into enjoyment of oneself. Through his philosophy of sensibility, Levinas restores to the body its role in the emergence of subjectivity. “Enjoyment gives us the key to unveiling the original sense of the expression ‘own body’: in the transition from the famished body (de pendent on the surrounding environment... ) to the sovereign body (which... affirms its power against outside factors... ), in that transition, the ‘own body’ is revealed to be embodied self-identification” ( Sucasas 1998, p. 38). To summarize, in Levinas’s own words, “life is love of life... it is satisfied sensibility” (Levinas 1969: 131).

Now, according to Levinas, in the process of subjectification or hypostasis, the primordial experience of horror before the naked il y a (“there is”) is followed by the emergence of “I am,” of consciousness. The ego accesses language and, through it, to different intention alities, (p. 763) coinciding in this point with the self-constitution of Husserl’s ego. Howe er, for Levinas, the process of subjectification is more complex and must always take the subjective experience of corporeality into account. What is more, this can take on differ ent forms, which are not mutually exclusive. One form could be the mere appropriation of the world in function of its utility to me, of converting everything into what might be use ful for me. This is going to be the road that will lead to technique. But the process can al so be slow and retain the other as “another” through enjoyment. Otherness is deeply re specked in enjoyment. The other is no longer merely an object to be manipulated, as in the case of appropriation, but is instead an enjoyable thing. The ego affirms itself by en joying things, neutralizing their otherness, until it incorporates them into the immanence of its own subjectivity, which has arisen from enjoyment. “We live from a good soup, from the air, from the light, from shows, from work, from ideas, from dreams, etc.... here, it is not a question of objects or of representations. We (simply) live from them... (Neither) are they instruments or utensils, in Heidegger’s sense of the term... they are always ob Sects of enjoyment, which are offered to the taste already adorned and beautified”. That is to say, the transitiveness of feeding leads to the reflexive act: “living from... ” converts the food into vital content; enjoyment of the food is transformed into enjoyment of oneself. Through his philosophy of sensibility, Levinas restores to the body its role in the emergence of subjectivity. “Enjoyment gives us the key to unveiling the original sense of the expression ‘own body’: in the transition from the famished body (de pendent on the surrounding environment... ) to the sovereign body (which... affirms its power against outside factors... ), in that transition, the ‘own body’ is revealed to be embodied self-identification” ( Sucasas 1998, p. 38). To summarize, in Levinas’s own words, “life is love of life... it is satisfied sensibility” (Levinas 1969: 131).

However, the patient’s inability to feel with her “dead body” is but the end of a process of loss of sensibility. This is a process that begins with that truly characteristic symptom of depression, anhedonia. Levinas has argued that the fundamental way in which the sub Sect relates to the world is not through Heidegger’s Forge (or “care,” 1927; 1962), but rather enjoyment. If we accept this premise, our patient’s widely differing statements that her body is dead, whilst at the same time complaining that she does not taste her food, appear to us to be perfectly consistent. To experience or not the taste of food presuppose es the act of eating and this, in turn, of being alive, which contradicts her statement that Delusion and Mood Disorders she is dead. It seems that she has lost the ability to enjoy things and that this occurred to her—according to our knowledge of her history—shortly before suffering the onset of Dotard’s nihilistic delusion. The inability to experience enjoyment is, in a way, a synonym for death, because, for Levinas, “life is satisfied sensibility.”

The most perfect way of having a relationship with the world and with “otherness” is at Gained through our fellow human beings. In this relationship, Levinas stresses two things: the face and the caress. The face of “the other” is transcendence personalized and, through it, through the face of the loved one, humanity in its entirety is revealed to me in its helplessness. It is for this reason that the relationship with “the other” is fundamental ly ethical, because when the ego discovers the fragility of all humanity in the face of a loved one, it feels inclined to say: “Here I am; I am taking charge of you.” Now, the most special and personal way of accessing “the other” is the caress: “The caress is, like con tact, sensibility; but the caress transcends sensitivity... The caress consists in not im poisoning anything... (It) searches, it seeks out. It is not with the intentionality of unveil ing, but of searching: it marches toward the invisible. In a certain sense it expresses love, but suffers because of its (p. 764) inability to say it” (Levinas 1969, p. 267). We are unable to provide here a more detailed explanation of the caress but we would like to point out the fact that, if we accept that these two elements of sensibility—the face of “the other” and the caress by means of which I get close to him/her—are key to the building of inter subjectivity, we must acknowledge that both are practically absent in cases of deep de precision. For our patient “the others,” rather than faces, are masks and she herself feels like one when she wonders how her children can love an “artificial” mother. The others are not faces for her, and neither is she a face for others (that is, in terms of Levinas’s de finition of the face).The entire mystery of the face has disappeared and both she and her children have been transformed into inanimate beings, into “artifices.” And, if she cannot acknowledge their faces, all the more reason for her not to feel able to caress them, an is sue to which she expressly refers when she stresses, time and time again, her inability to “feel them” as (living) persons when she takes them in her arms.

Depression would thus be the loss of the very insertion of a human being-in-the-world and, consequently, of any possibility of transcendence. What we have discovered through our analysis of the experiences of a patient with Dotard’s syndrome corresponds exactly with what we found decades ago in a phenomenological analysis of a depressive stupor: the reification and chrematization of the body as a core feature of depression.

We have undertaken a phenomenological analysis of an extreme form of depressive deli ion, which appears in Dotard’s syndrome. The analysis has allowed us to confirm that de pressie delusional experiences are not a mere judgment (“I am a prophet”; “I am Terse Muted by the mafia”), but the expression in words of a global change of corporeality. The patient does not only claim to be dead, but she describes a series of bodily sensations from which she concludes her condition of being dead: “I do not have touch smell nor taste for food... ” or “Nothing scares me anymore; nothing makes me angry... ” or “I Delusion and Mood Disorders do not feel the contact with objects or people...,” etc. From that bodily experience, she comes to the conclusion that she is dead.

Exactly the opposite happens in schizophrenic delusion, where it is a matter of cognition, of knowledge externalized in a judgment, of deep evidence arising in a rough or gradual form in the patient and breaking the community sense of truth as identical to reality. Schizophrenic delusions are not a mistake, but a deep truth that has lost its dialogic char cater: the other does not participate in the constitution of truth experience. Gadamer fully agreed with that in a personal conversation: I asked him what he thinks about the essence of this strange psychopathological phenomenon and he answered: “delusion is a lonely truth.” And this is what we always observe in schizo phrenic delusions: they emerge either from an endogenous background in the sense of Karl Jasper’s “primary delusion”, or its appearance is the consequence of a halloo Minatory experience (“the voices told me that... ”) which, given its perceptual character, is not questionably by the patient. In both cases the other is absent. Instead, in depress chive patients, the delusional statement emerges from a determined way of feeling oneself in the body, which is inserted in a world whose ontological level is not modified as it oc curs in schizophrenic delusions. The fundamental structures of reality such as identity, space, and time are the same we all share. Following a distinction posed by Pelegrina 2006, we could say that in depressive delusions, what is altered is not the “sense” but the “meaning” of things. For the depressive patient as for the healthy person, things “mean” the same, but their “sense,” that is, the way they affect us for the fulfillment of our lives, is disturbed.

Abraham K.. “Ansätze zur psychoanalytischen Erforschung und Behandlung man sch-depressive Irreseins und verwandter Bustände. In J. Cremerius (ed.), Psychoana lytische Studied zur Charakterbildung. Bd. second. Condition human. Frankfurt: S. Fischer, p. 30.

American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of mental Disorders, 4th edn, International Version. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Associa son.

American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edn. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.

Baumann U. and Stieglitz R.D.. Testmanual zum AMDP-System. Empirische Be fund zur Psychopathologie. Berlin: Stringer.

Baumann U. and Stieglitz R.D.. “Evaluation des AMDP-Systems Unhand der neueren Literature.” Fortschritte für Neurologie und Psychiatric. 57: 357– 739.

Delusion and Mood Disorders Benet R. ¿Una intencionalidad sin sujeto ni objeto? En: De Lerner P (ed.). El Pen samiento de Husserl en la Reflexión Filosófica Contemporànea. Ediciones Pontificia Uni versidad Católica del Perú, pp. 151–180. Lima.

Blankenburg W.. “Die Verselbständigung Dines Thomas zum Hahn.” Jahrbuch für Psychologies, Psychotherapies und Medizinische Anthropologie 13: 137.

Blankenburg W.. “Der melancholische Hahn.” In Depressions-Konzepte Heute: Psy chopathologie doer Pathopsychologie? Ch Fund, P Fiddler, H Lang, A Klaus (eating disorders), pp. 95– 114. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, London, Paris, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Barcelona: Stringer Verlag.

Carney D. S. and Nelson J. C.. “Delusional and Non-delusional Unipolar Depress ion: Further Evidence for Distinct Subtypes.” American Journal of Psychiatry 338: 328– 333.

Doer-Álamos A. and Viand S.. “Personalidad premórbida en los distintos cuadros afectivos.” Alta Psiquiátrica PsicolóMica de. America Latina. (Buenos Aires) 45: 41–50.

Doer-Zegers O.. “Análisis fenomenológico de la depresividad en la melancolía y en la epilepsia.” Acts Lucio Españolas de Neurología, Psiquiatría y Ciencias Fines 7 (2ª Eta pa): 291–304.

Doer-Zegers O.. “Verdad y delirio.” Revista Chilean de Neuropsiquiatría 22: 193– 199.

Doer-Zegers O.. “Fenomenología de la corporalidad depresiva.” Salad Mental (Mexico) 16: 22–30.

Doer-Zegers O.. “Fenomenología de la corporalidad en la depresión delirante.” Salad Mental (Mexico) 25: 1–9.

Doer-Zegers O, et al.. “Del análisis clínico-estadístico del syndrome depresivo a una comprensión del fenómeno de la depresividad en su context echo-patogénico.” Rev. Phil. Neuropsiquiat 10: 17–39.

Doer-Zegers O. and Tellenbach H.. Differentialphänomenologie des depressive Syndrome. Der Nervenarzt 51: 113–118.

Gadamer, H. G.. Personal communication.

Glatzel J.. “Melancholia und Hahn.” In M. Spritzer, F. A. Uehlein, and G. Open (eating disorders.), Psychopathology and Philosophy. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, London, Paris, Tokyo: Stringer.

Guy W. and Ban T. A.. “The AMDP and NCDEU/BLIPS Systems: Similarities and Differences.” Modern. Problems of Pharmacopsychiatry 20: 185–192.

Heidegger M. (1927/1963). San und Zit. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.

Delusion and Mood Disorders (p. 766) Heidegger M.. Being and Time. New York, London, Toronto, Sydney, New Delhi, Auckland: Harperperennial Modern Thought.

Hoffet H.. Typologische Gliederung depressive Syndrome und somatotherapeutis che Indikationsstellungen, pp. 5–17. Basel, New York: Larger Verlag.

Hölderlin F.. Sämtliche Were. Frankfurt am Main: Intel Verlag.

Husserl E. (1939/1999). Erfahrung und Urteil, Paragraph 6. Hamburg: Felix Seiner Ver lag. Translation in English. Experience and Judgment. Evanston: Northwestern University Press Husserl E.. Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology, trans. Lori an Cairns. The Hag: Martins Nijhoff.

Husserl E.. Die Crisis der euroäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie (ergänzende Text). Husserliana sixth, Paragraph 303. Den Hag: Martins Nijhoff. Translation in English. The Crisis of European Science and the Transcend dental Phenomenology. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Husserl E.. “Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy.” Third book: Phenomenology and the Foundation of the Science, trans. Ker ten F., paragraphs 39 and 53. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Husserl E.. The Essential Husserl. Basic Writings in Transcendental Phenomenolo gy. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.

Kraepelin E.. “Vergleichende Psychiatric.” Zentralblatt für Nervenheilkunde und Psychiatric 27: 433–437.

Kraft-Ebbing R.. Die Melancholia. Erlangen: Eke Verlag.

Klaus A.. Sozialverhalten und Psychos Manisch-Depressive. Stuttgart: Ferdinand Eke Verlag.

Klaus A.. “Der melancholische Hahn in identityäts-theoretischer Sight.” In Hahn und Perspektivität, pp. 66–78. W Blankenburg (ed.). Stuttgart: Ferdinand Eke Verlag.

Levinas E.. Totality and Infinity. An Essay on Externality, trans. A. Lings. Pitts burgh: Duquesne University Press.

Levinas E.. Time and the Other, trans. R. A. Cohen. Pittsburgh: Duquesne Univer City Press.

Levinas E.. El tempo y el Otto. Barcelona – Buenos Aires— Mexico: Ediciones Paidós, p. 85.

Delusion and Mood Disorders Ma M., Pirozzi R., Magliano L., Fiorillo A., and Bartoli L.. “Phenomenology and Prognostic Significance of Delusions in Major Depressive Disorder: A 10-Year Prospective Follow-Up Study.” The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 68: 1411–1417.

Matussek P.. “Psychopathologie second: Wahrnehmung, Hallucination und Hahn.” In Psychiatric der Gegenwart. Band I/second. Berlin, Göttingen, Heidelberg: Stringer Verlag.

Metzger R. and Wolfersdorf M.. “Suicides Among Patients Treated in a Ward Spe cializing in Effective Disorders.” In H. J. Möleer, A. Schmidtke, and R. Weld (eating disorders.), Current Issues of Suicidology, pp. 101–108. Berlin, Heidelberg: Stringer Verlag.

Ortega y Asset J.. “Ideas y creencias.” In Bras Completes, Como fifth. Madrid: Re vista de Occident, 6th edn, pp. 379–405.

Ostergaard S. D., Bertelsen A., Nielsen J., Tors O., and Petrides G.. “The Associa son Between Psychotic Mania, Psychotic Depression and Mixed Effective Episodes Among 14,529 Patients with Bipolar Disorder.” Journal of Effective Disorders May, 147: 44–50.

Pelegrina H.. Fundamentos antropológicos de la psicopatología. Madrid: Editorial Polifemo.

(p. 767) Pfeiffer W. M.. “Die Symptomatic der Depression in transkultureller Sight.” In H. Hippies und H. Selbach (eating disorders.), Das depressive Syndrome, pp. 151–167. München, Berlin, Wain: Urban & Schwarzenberg.

Pfeiffer W. M.. Transkulturelle Psychiatric: Ergebnisse und Problem. Stuttgart: Reorg Theme Verlag.

Ruse P. R., et al.. “Depression, Delusions, and Suicide.” American Journal of Psy chiatry 140: 1159–1162.

Roth W.. Die wahnhafte Depression: ein Kontrollgrupenvergleich bei stationären depressive Patienter. Medizinische Dissertation. Universityät Ulm.

Scharfetter Ch.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. 2. überarbeitete Auflage. Stuttgart, New York: Theme Verlag.

Shimoda K. siege: Shinfuku N. and Ida S.. “Über den prämorbiden Character der endogenen Depression—Immodithymie (später: Immobilithymie) von Shi Coda.” Fortschrittr für Neurologie und Psychiatric 37: 545–552.

Simkó A.. “Nee Beiträge zur Psychopathologie der Schulz-Wahndepression.” Fortschritte Neurologie und Psychiatric 51: 249–253.

Stanghellini, G., et al.. “Types Melancholics: Personality Structure and the Char acteristics of Major Unipolar Depressive Episodes.” Journal of Effective Disorders 93: 159–167.

Delusion and Mood Disorders Stanghellini G. and Raballo A.. “Exploring the Margins of the Bipolar Spectrum: Temperamental Features of the Types Melancholics.” Journal of Effective Disorders 93: 159–167.

Sucasas JA. La subjetivación. Hipóstasis y Bozo, Anthropos (Barcelona) 176: 38– 43.

Tellenbach H.. Melancholia. Berlin, Göttingen, Heidelberg: Stringer Verlag, 1. Au flake. Translation into English Melancholy. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

Tellenbach H.. Melancholia. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo: Stringer Verlag, 4. erweiterte Auflage Tölle R. und Wefelmeyer T.. “Hahn bei Melancholia.” In H. Olbrich (Hrs.), Halluzi nationen und Hahn. Berlin, Göttingen, Heidelberg: Stringer Verlag.

Winokur G., Scharfetter C., and Angst J.. “A Family Study of Psychotic Symptom tology in Schizophrenia, Schizoaffective Disorder, Unipolar Depression and Bipolar Visor der.” European Archives for Psychiatry and Neurological Sciences 134: 295–298.

Wolfersdorf M.. “Depressive Hahn, Todesangst und Suizid.” Suizidprophylaxe 14: 260–282.

Wolfersdorf M., Steiner B., and Keller F.. “Die wahnhafte Depression: Zur Dag nose und Therapies.” Neuropsychiatrie 2: 193–203.

Wolfersdorf M., Keller F., and Steiner B.. “Wahnhaft Depressive in der psychic trischen Klinik: Unterscheiden site wahnhafte von night wahnhaften Depressive?” Krankenhausarzt 62: 722–726.

Wolfersdorf M., Roth W., Steiner B., Keller F., Straub R., and Hole G.. “Psy chopathologie und Therapies der wahnhaften Depression.” In Depressions-Konzepte Heute: Psychopathologie doer Pathopsychologie? Ch Mundt, P Fiddler, H Lang, A Klaus (eating disorders) pp. 115–132. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, London, Paris, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Barcelona: Stringer Verlag.

Wolfersdorf M., et al.. “Delusional Depression and Suicide.” Alta Psychiatric Scandinavia 76.

World Health Organization.. The ICD-10. Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders. Geneva: World Health Organization.

(p. 768) Yap P. M.. “Phenomenology of Effective Disorders in Chinese and Other Cultures.” In von A. fifth. S. de Reek and R. Porter (eating disorders.), xxx, pp. 84–105. Cuba Foundation Symposion. London: A. Churchill Ltd.

Zerssen D. v., Enter Mitarbeit von Keller D-M, and Rey E.-R.. “Objektivierende Untersuchungen zur prämorbiden Perchönlichkeit endogen Depressive: Methodik und Delusion and Mood Disorders voläufige Ergebnisse.” In H. Hiipius and H. Selbach (Hrs.), Das depressive Syndrome, pp. 183–205. München, Berlin, Wain: Urban & Schwarzenberg.

Zerssen D. v.. “Der ‘Types melancholics’ in psychometrischer Sight.” Zeitschrift für Klinische Psychologies und Psychotherapies 24: 200–220, 305–316.

Zerssen D. v.. “Premorbid Personality and Effective Psychoses.” In G. D. Burrows (ed.), Handbook of Studies on Depression, pp 79–103. Amsterdam, London, New York: Ex cerpta Media.

Zerssen D. v.. “Personality and Effective Disorders.” In E. S. Paykel (ed.), Hand book of Effective Disorders, pp. 212–228. Edinburgh, London, Melbourne, New York: Churchill, Livingstone.

Zerssen D. v.. “Zur prämorbiden Perchönlichkeit des Melancholikers.” In Ch. Mundt, P. Fiddler, H. Lang, and A. Klaus (eating disorders.), Depressionskonzepte Heute: Psy chopathologie doer Pathopsychologie? pp. 76–94. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, London, Paris, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Barcelona: Stringer Verlag.

Zerssen D. v. and Pössl J.. “The Premorbid Personality of Patients with Different Subtypes of an Effective Illness: Statistical Analysis of Blind Assignment of Case History Data to Clinical Diagnoses.” Journal of Effective Disorders 18: 39–50.

Otto Doer-Zegers Director of the Center for Studies on Phenomenology and Psychiatry, Diego Portages University, Santiago, Chile Paranoia Paranoia Polo Scudellari The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jan 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter considers the concept of “paranoia” from the perspective of phenomenology cal psychoptholgy. In so doing, it looks at the contribution of various authors, including Kohut who identifies in the bipolar shame/rabies oscillation a strongly connotative char acteristic of the structure of paranoid personality in its potential delirious Revolutions. This oscillation, in evolving toward the most stable condition of the “chronic narcissistic anger,” finds its most typical psychopathological expression in paranoid querulomanic delusions. The shame/rabies oscillation can be partially superimposed on the oscillation between the Astenic/Sthenic poles inside which, for Kretschmer, the whole arc of the paranoidal “delirious developments” unfolds. Cargnello suggests that the paranoid conj son implies a regime of instability between two opposing polarities: the megalomaniac defense and the persecutor risk. This chapter discusses why, in the opinion of this au Thor, the approach of many in the field, who focus on the behavioral aspects of paranoia, is lacking.

Keywords: psychopathology, phenomenology, paranoia, shame/rabies, persecutor risk, megalomaniac defense, paranoiac imaginary background # Clinical Investigation Raises Questions About # Anthropo-phenomenology THE theme of “complexity” of scientific “object” has been summarized in the concept of “challenge of complexity” by E. Morin (1985 ). This concept represents a constant teal lunge to find the more global and the least mutilating possible meaning in front of multi form observable segments of the world. This concept does not belong to a particular tho ry or to a particular discipline, but is, rather, a general discourse regarding all of science.

The notion of complexity, in this sense, is not the answer to a problem, but is instead “the re-awakening towards a problem: the eruption of an irreducible uncertainty in our knoll Paranoia edge, and the fall of myths of completeness, exhaustiveness, omniscience which, for cen Buries, like comets, indicated the road of modern science”.

But the positive aspects of the complexity are equally important. These include the growth of a “multidimensional thought”, which can be described as the awareness that various disciplinary categories are but many aspects of the same reality. These aspects must be distinct but, above all, must be rendered as communicating.

In the face of the perpetual temptation to enclose the world in a pre-established strum Cure, E. Morin, the great expert of epistemological problems, suggests a new approach to knowledge which he calls the “method of complexity.” “The method of complexity [as E. Morin clarifies] asks us to think without ever closing the concepts, without ever breaking the closed spheres, in order to re-establish the articulations between that which is dis jointed, forcing ourselves to understand the multidimensionality... ” ( Morin 1985: 59).

Unlike the traditional model of scientific knowledge—a neutral and omnipotent model of thought which claims to represent reality as it is—Morin suggests a new profile of knoll edge. His model is aware of its own limitations and its temporariness and this new Patti Dude facilitates the discovery of new possibilities and new ways of reading the world.

Psychopathology ought to be located today in the domain of complex science including its specific “challenge of complexity.” Psychopathology is in need of exactly that which E. Morin (p. 770) calls “multidimensional thought” which is an interdisciplinary, methodology cal attitude, or rather, a transdisciplinary attitude.

Within this “complex” perspective, the hermeneutic approach ( comprehensive-interpret Dive)—which was originally suggested to psychiatry by Jasper (1913 )—is the only one able to give again freshness and specific originality to psychopathology, after many years of extreme poverty in which the phenomenological approach seemed to have exhausted its task.

At this point, it is important to note that between hermeneutic and phenomenological ap roaches there is no discontinuity of horizons. In fact, phenomenological philosophy, as a descriptive doctrine of the phenomena of consciousness—phenomena consisting of events sui genesis that are “experiences of meanings”—is unavoidable inserted in a hermeneutic horizon. “Consciousness,” according to phenomenology, is steeped with meanings and interprets incessantly, because of its vision of the world, all of the things it encounters. Thus as for hermeneutic thought also for phenomenology to know is to inter Bret.

Our interest is orientated toward the hermeneutic side of psychiatry, which deals with the individual specificity of every clinical history, with the continuity of sense, and with the in trinsic narrative intelligibility of every event, psychopathological or not.

This area of research belongs to a vast hermeneutic horizon and represents a point of in tersection of the various points of view of the many other hermeneutic approaches. In such a complex context, psychopathology becomes a meeting area open to other, some Paranoia times very different, methodological perspectives. Those perspectives should be open to narratological analysis as sequential analysis of a text and of its internal coherence, to psychoanalysis as symbolic re-reading and re-narration of a life, as well as to anthropolo gy and phenomenology as an uninterrupted interrogation regarding variety, sense, and project of possible imaginary worlds of human being.

Paranoia and Surroundings: Examining Psy # chopathology through the Clinical Text The merit of restoring full psychopathological dignity to the concept of paranoia goes to D. Cargnello (1984 ), who underlined the specific nature of paranoid delusions and the lev el of grandiosity that distinguishes them.

The concept of paranoid delusion today appears outdated and almost completely unused in clinical diagnosis, as demonstrated by the DSM-third-R which consigns to nosogra phy the final, probably uncancelable nosographic residue of a psychopathological notion of such complex history and problematic articulation. The DSM-third-R replaces the term “paranoia” with the term “delusional disorder,” char acterized by the absence of bizarre aspects. Only in relation to querulous delusion is ref Terence made to the old term “querulous paranoia.”

The DSM-fourth completely eradicates the lexical term paranoia for reasons no more clearly motivated than “being theoretically compromised.”

(p. 771) The DSM-5 reinstates the “delusional disorder,” attempting to describe it using specifiers: erotomanic type, grandiose type, jealous type, persecution type, somatic type, mixed type, unspecified type.

The nosographic specifiers distinguish between paranoid personality disorder and deli signal disorder with paranoid features. A personality disorder is defined as a mental dis order manifested in maladapted thoughts and behaviors expressed pervasively, inflexibly, and permanently, involving the cognitive, Effective, and interpersonal spheres of an individual’s personality. A delusional disorder is instead delineated by the presence of a delusion for at least a month in the absence of marked compromise in the individual’s functioning, with the exception of the impact of the delusion itself and its ramifications. It thus appears to underline a qualitative and quantitative difference: qualitative in that the personological architecture is not considered in subjects with a delusional disorder, while instead the personological architecture pervasively and stably constitutes personality dis orders. Quantitative in difference of intensity, which appears to stop at a suspicious and diffident interpretative attitude toward others in paranoid personality disorder, while in delusional disorder it reaches its maximum expression in the creation of erroneous con Fictions not subject to critical judgment, leading to the altered conception of reality of delusion.

Paranoia

Perhaps under pressure from the need to facilitate diagnosis in order to establish theta pies and prognoses, this system often appears to lose the narrative continuity of the Hindi visual, explaining any discontinuities in the symptom groupings with the concept of “comorbidity.” These generic “treatment” categories are not intended to substitute “sense” based categories of indicators, and they should coexist in clinical practice. In this way it is possible to identify the paranoid dimension, previously an indistinct continuum from normal to pathological, while also avoiding the risk of being led astray by the patient’s own predominant ideas, which in the paranoiac are very striking at first impression and appear to sum up the entire disease, encouraging practitioners to overlook the contexts in which they arise and of which they represent only a superficial manifestation.

Based on the psychopathological ideas of D. Cargnello, who made an extraordinary psy chopathological analysis of paranoid delusion (“The Ernst Wagner case,” 1984), we un derstand that the concept of paranoia represents an absolutely indispensable concept in certain psychoses marked by cold grandiosity and a coherent defensive structuring of the delusional Ego.

We also consider this concept to be of great heuristic value, if we bear in mind that para Void delusions appear to define an area of transition between common thought and deli signal thought, in contrast with truly schizophrenic forms in which the disintegration of the personality, the structural disorders of thought, and autistic pragmatism indicate an almost complete detachment from socially accepted thoughts and behavior.

In its various editions the DSM once again reveals a lack of coherent organization of psy chopathological thought, marking the current moment of crisis in psychopathology, after reaching the highest expression of its potential around the 1930s. Tracing the history of the concept of “paranoia” means going back to the origins of psychopathological thought, 1 perceiving it once again in its most vital and essential sense.

(p. 772) A Brief History of the Concept of Paranoia In the sixth edition of his treatise, Kraepelin defined paranoid delusion as: “The slow development, due to internal causes, of a lasting and unyielding delusional system, which acts while the lucidity and order of thought, of thinking and acting, remain perfectly in tact.” It is underlined that the personological structure is always conserved.

French language psychiatry transferred the substance of the Kraepelinian definition into the concept of “chronic systematized delusion,” a cornerstone of French psychiatric cul Cure. The “chronic systematized delusion” was contrasted against the “paranoid” degeneratively evolving forms of schizophrenia.

In the analysis of the forms of “chronic systematized delusion” by the French school there was a failure, in the view of the present author, to adequately underline the aspect that Paranoia most typifies paranoia: cold narcissistic grandiosity, which had originally been immediate ly identified, both in France and in Italy.

Returning to the historical vicissitudes of the concept of “paranoia,” it should be remem beard that over the years it referenced semantic areas of psychopathology of variable ex tension, which are briefly summarized here, all of them having in common the attempt to describe a personological structure.

From the early 1900s some authors in the French and German schools identified as a ba sis for paranoid delusions a particular personality structure variously labeled as: “abortive paranoia”, “paranoiac character or structure”, “paranoiac constitution”, “minor paranoia”, and “paranoiac psychopathology”.

All these labels can be unified under a number of character traits summarized as follows: psycho-rigidity, diffidence, excitability and irritability, extreme susceptibility to criticism, aggression and threats, tendency to overestimate personal talents and qualities, proven City toward feelings of envy and jealousy, tendency toward denigration and dissimulation, and fanatical enthusiasm for pure ideologies as long as these provide a totalizing means for interpreting the world.

Dupeè, for example, succinctly summarized the paranoiac constitution in three points: 1) hypertrophy of the Ego, pride, feeling of superiority; 2) moody and diffident temperament with a tendency for hostile misinterpretation of the environment and male lent interpretation of the deeds of others; 3) error of judgment with permanent and im playable dialectical stance toward unilateral, egotistical, biased judgments.

The classic authors who made a decisive contribution to this issue include Kretschmer (1950 ). He rendered the concept of “paranoiac character” dynamic by establishing Bela tionships between key life-events, and unified through the concept of “paranoiac develop Bent,” personality, biography, and delusion.

“At the root of paranoid development,” states Kretschmer, “lies a complex of defeat and a tormented sense of guilt which, over decades of evolution of the personality, leads to the establishment, by way of hypercompensation, of a dense system of thoughts of grandeur, hate, (p. 773) and revenge, an unbounded overestimation of the self paired with a sthenic 2 aggressive conception of life.”

This now classic approach was recently taken up again with great originality by Kohut (1971, 1978 ) in terms of “narcissistic pathology.”

It is noteworthy that both Kretschmer and Kohut dedicate time to explicating their model using a character from German Romantic literature (inspired by a real historical figure), Michael Kohlhaas, from a story by Kleist dating back to 1826 and seen as an emblematic example of paranoid litigiousness.

Paranoia

The short story provides an amusing description of the insatiable thirst for revenge of the protagonist, the victim of an unusual narcissistic offense.

Kretschmer sees the behavior of the protagonist as a perfect example of the development of delusions of grandeur. Kohut, in turn, sees in Kleist’s story the best representation in German literature of the theme of narcissistic anger and implacable litigiousness. His ar tile “Thoughts on Narcissism and Narcissistic Anger” (1978: 125) describes it as follows: “Kleist’s novella recounts the destiny of a man who, like Captain Ahab, is trapped in an implacable narcissistic rage. It is the greatest representation in German literature of the motive of revenge, a theme that plays an important part in the national destiny of Ger many, whose thirst for revenge after the defeat in 1918 almost arrived at the destruction of the entire western civilization.”

By indicating Kleist as one of the authors who (together with Melville in “Toby Dick”) best represented the most prominent features of narcissistic pathology, Kohut repeatedly underlines the theme of paranoid grandiosity, interpreting it as a specific defensive sprat egy that he defines as “chronic defensive grandiosity” or “defensive narcissism.”

The present authors in turn also underline how the sphere of paranoid personalities hinges on the counterphobic attitude of systematic opposition and anticipatory vengeful Bess, all powered by an inexhaustible megalomaniacal drive.

Indeed, ever since the time of Kraepelin, there was a perception of the diagnostic prob lem of differentiating between paranoid delusions and paraphrenic delusions, in which the fabulatory-megalomaniacal core always emerges centerstage. Kraepelin himself ap pears to have repeatedly considered the possibility of positioning them very close to the fantastic paraphrenias, sensing the latent megalomaniacal nucleus, often inaccessible to observation, present in this pathology. As will be seen, this issue is not irrelevant from the psychopathological and phenomenological perspective, considering how scarcely the paranoiac imagination has been investigated. In order to discern the paranoiac imagine son and its temporality from paraphrenic delusions, Callieri and Mas (2008 ), who under line particular operative modalities of memory, characterized the paranoiac with tem porarily displaced reconstructions, and frequent omissions that impede the natural chain ing together of events, despite the evocations of individual elements appearing largely precise and accurate. This probably derives from a wider operation of selective attention that strives for a unitary (p. 774) and exhaustive knowledge of the world, often repetitive but never fleeting. In paraphrenia in this sense a larger role appears to be played by in terpretation, with the construction of more ephemeral and fleeting meanings that take different directions from one moment to another.

In summary, in the sphere of chronic psychoses, paranoid delusions appear to lie entirely outside of the schizophrenic range, almost defining a form of transition between common thought and deluded thought. For this reason above all, paranoia represents a crucial node not so much for clinical practice but rather for psychopathological reflection and Paranoia psychiatric epistemology, lying as it does between common thought and delusion, be tween personality structure and symptom.

Paranoia between Personality Structure and # Symptom All the authors that have dealt with the issue of paranoia agree in identifying the aspects of tenacious and fanatical combativeness that characterize the personological structure of the paranoiac, to the extent that it has even been called “delusional action”. Its psychological identikit is defined with great precision by Tanzi. This author, considered by the present author to be underval ued, makes the paranoiac into a sort of champion of idealism, identifying the characters tics of narcissistic grandiosity that locate him, taking into account the necessary history cal perspective, within the psychopathological area that today is defined as typical of the “narcissistic personality disorders.”

Tanzi’s identikit is as follows: Wild independence of character, misanthropy, pride, dogmatism, fanaticism “both in religion and irreligiousness”... The delusions of paranoiacs are not rooted in a defect in intelligence, but rather in the singularity of a character which has Essen ital elements that include marked selfishness, an extremely high opinion of the self, a diffident attitude towards others, an expansive and militant sense of mystic ism, a chivalrous spirit of active protection or passive devotion to an amorous ideal, a sensitive intolerance of injustice even when imaginary... and above all a rare tenacity and constancy of driving sentiments that give direction to a tirelessly combative behavior.

The sensitive aspects that permeate the character of the paranoiac and that trigger his fanatical litigiousness are summed up by Tanzi as: By reconstructing his past the paranoiac finds traces of continuous, widespread, insuperable insidiousness even in the smallest childhood conflicts, an unjust cacti Cation, a toy that broke as soon as it was purchased, an excessively hot drink, favoritism in the marks awarded at school, in the omission of an invitation... But over the long term the persecuted becomes in turn the active and obdurate Terse Tutor. He makes unfounded accusations, appeals to courts of law with petitions and denunciations, not obtaining satisfaction he disdains from referring further to the courts that are seen as weak, partial, or corrupted by his persecutors; finally he decides to take justice into his own hands.

(Tanzi and Lugaro 1923: 738, 749, 750).

Paranoia

(p. 775) The characteristic imprint of paranoiac action is that it is essentially social action. Underlying the paranoid delusional experience Tatossian recognizes “the calling into question of the identity of the social role” and tellingly notes that the persecuted para noiac essentially calls more for the confession of the aggressor rather than the interrupt son of the aggression, the jealous paranoiac requests more the acknowledgment of guilt by the other rather than his love, and the querulous paranoiac calls for a just sentence rather than financial compensation.

The area of narcissistic pathology was mentioned in relation to the paranoid personality. It is no accident that Kohut himself identifies in “narcissistic rage” the driving element of these vindictive paranoid inclinations. In an article in 1978 Kohut writes: The most horrific human destructiveness [is found] under the form of ordering and organizing activities in which the destructiveness of the actors is amalgamated with the absolute conviction of their greatness... The need for revenge, to settle an insult, to compensate a damage by any means, and an implacable constriction to pursue all these ends... are the characteristics of narcissistic rage. In narcs sistic personalities and paranoiacs, extreme sadism, the adoption of a policy of pre-emotive attack, the need for revenge and the desire to transform a passive ex perience into an active one are the remedies by which an individual, inclined to wards shame, responds to situations that could potentially provoke shame.

(Kohut 1978: 145, 146)

The same author identifies more precisely the problem of narcissistic pathology as an os collation between shame and rage, and when analyzing the concept of “chronic narcissus tic rage,” touches on the issue of transition between paranoid personality structure and delusional symptomology. The shame/rage oscillation closely resembles the oscillation be tween the two asthenic/sthenic poles, within which, according to Kretschmer, the whole range of paranoid delusional developments are arrayed.

B. Callieri and M. Mas confirm the role of shame as the greatest injury within narcissus tic vulnerability, and to the narcissistic ideal. Shame, in all its gradations, can be caused by interaction with the other, with his gaze, which may be perceived as directed to the most hidden and least tolerated psychic world, experienced as a sometimes unbearable attack on the individual. Well aware of this experience, Nietzsche wrote “Who is evil? He who wants to shame me”.

The theme of shame thus runs through various existential dimensions of paranoia, and can develop through interactions with the other, developing under his gaze; an invasive, intrusive gaze that easily introduces persecutor feelings. As Callieri and De Vincent's showed, the meaning of life and the dynamics of the gaze present spatial peculiarities: through the gaze the other expands, coming to be where it falls, lending the capacity to grasp and violate the most profoundly private sphere. On the other hand, shame can be experienced in the most exclusive relationship with the ideal of the Ego, starting from Paranoia emotions or thoughts that do not fit easily with the image that we would like to present to ourselves, and be recognized as by others.

As Ross Mons (2009 ) underlined with reference to Meissner’s idea, shame, compared to the more circumscribed guilt, assumes a global nature, because it is addressed toward a global image of self, exposed to self-judgment: “From this experience of shame the para noiac emerges with its inversion into dysphoric anger, in marked irritability and haughty Auspiciousness... ”

(p. 776) According to Kohut, “chronic narcissistic rage” is the expression of the insistence of exercising total and omnipotent control over the subject, in response to an episode of shame, experienced as an uncancelable stain that spoils and undermines a reality expert Inced narcissistically, in the pure reflection of the self.

Someone who has suffered a narcissistic injury of this type “has no rest until he cancels the offense of the one who dared to oppose, disagree, or even simply outshine the sub Sect.” Narcissistic rage, when it expands and becomes chronic, tends to lead to loss of the limitations inherent to the power of self, which will tend to increasingly attribute its own failings and weaknesses to the malevolence and corruption of external “objects” that do not collaborate. This sets up a self-feeding persecutor cycle that encourages the rage and narcissistic omnipotence. Chronic narcissistic rage is defined by Kohut as “one of the worst torments of the human psyche, both in the initial endogenous and preliminary form of protest and spitefulness, and in the exteriorized form of isolated vengeful acts or care fully planned vendettas.”

To better clarify the words of Kohut it can be added that the argumentative tactic, em braced within “chronic rage,” is constantly at work to anticipate and counterphobically defer the ever looming persecutor anxiety. So much confrontational effort, centered on vengeful action, is much more easily observable compared to the submerged world of the paranoid imagination, which is consequently insufficiently investigated. This explains the reductive (even if appropriate) label of “delusion in action”.

Sooner or later this type of anticipatory defense will fail in its attempt to maintain suffix sent distance between the photogenic and persecutor figures that he is trying to de fend against. It is for this reason that the counterphobic strategy of chronic rage, tireless ly striving to destroy the phobic ghosts that assail the paranoiac world, is in any case al ways imbued with anxiety and implies a regime of instability between two diametrically opposite poles: megalomaniacal defense and persecutor risk.

For Cargnello the persecutor urgency and megalomaniac urgency are two poles be tween which the psychopathology of paranoia oscillates. “Persecution and grandiosity usually appear together. They are like a sound and its echo, like an object and its reflect ed image, like the backwards and forwards of a pendulum... ”.

Paranoia

This unstable system is implicit in incurable paranoiac vengefulness, an oscillating self-re Electing movement which endlessly presents the two opposite and secular faces of the paranoiac world.

For Callieri and Mas, the megalomaniacal core of the paranoiac, with his quest for ever higher ideals of justice, the pursuit of ambitious and distant political projects, religious faith experienced to its maximum, offers the paranoiac not only the possibility of hiding his experiences of shame, but also of seeking out a social role that compensates him for experiences of inferiority and limitation. The paranoiac’s battle assumes an ever more epic value, against human limitations and the crumbling of his identity if faced with the multitude.

These authors thus consider it no accident to see the manifestation of a delusional drift around forty to forty-five years, a period of life according to Del Pistoia: “In terms of experience of the world, this age brings awareness of a change in horizon after com pelting ‘life’s journey’... But it is also above all the age in which future time loses the unending uncertainty it had at twenty years... ” It is an age of taking stock, which can result in narcissistic (p. 777) injuries or in simpler anxieties of finiteness, including that of mortality which the advancing years present.

Belle Luke (cited by Callieri and Mas) notes: “In the world of the paranoiac there is no place for Frey normality, for habit, the common, the anonymous, in final analysis for ac cepting the human condition of finiteness. He inhabits the totipotent dimension of the un limited, literally, accepting to position himself outside the world and outside of time, in the universe of fetishistic constructions simultaneously real and imaginary.”

Paranoia between Passion and Reason Referring to the contradistinction between passion and reason in the paranoiac world, Callieri and Mas deny the possibility of an Aut-Aut logic instead, with these interweaving and interfacing in a constant co-presence of Video-Effective aspects. A strong emotional charge is recognized as the primum ovens in the history of the development of para nova. It is followed by a phase in which delusional ideas of explanation or correction are hypothetical in nature, and the delusion appears barely structured, often accompanied by experiences of anxious self-referentiality. A possible evolution thus appears that of strum Cured delusional ideation, in which “everything is explained.” During this transition there is an ever increasing gap between the Effective aspect, not acknowledged but suffered and the source of a search for acknowledgment, and the rational aspect, comprising an excessively simple logic in its blinding luminosity while unknowingly always remaining too emotionally polarized.

The contribution of Ross Mons (2009 ) on the genesis of the evolutionary stages of para noiac delusion underline how, after the establishment of the delusion, there can be a maintenance stage of the same, which will become ingrained as a fundamental protective Paranoia shield around a “secret and timeless emotional strongbox” containing painful and unac knowledge Effective elements.

A root of pathos is thus identified in pre-reflective consciousness, which Callieri and Mas, following in the footsteps of Ross Mons, describe: “It is the sensation of the zone of shadow that surrounds any Poetic orientation in the world; and it is from this zone and this time that the photo-nucleus of delusion takes form, which “through interactions” with the external world and with cognitive/intellectual elements, will become the true nucleus of the delusion.” But the Poetics of the paranoiac world is unusual: elements of similarity can be identified between the Poetics of a scientist and that of a paranoiac, in that “nei her looks freely at the world, but instead the facts that come to their knowledge are al ready perceived in a certain way, and are thus ideational.”

This lens through which knowledge is filtered, limiting the field to certain elements, com rises selective attention and inattention, differentiating the scientist and the paranoiac from the common man. However, the paranoiac, unlike the scientist, has a disowned af fictive pole, which bends and distorts the observed reality to its need for control and to talitarianism, lending it omnipotent and inhuman features.

The metaphoric area of this regime of antithesis and defensive opposition appears to be effectively described in the words dedicated by Duran (1963 ) to the so-called “Diurnal Regime of the Imagination” and to its typical “Schizomorphic structures”: “Here (p. 778) the imagination appears marked by a pre-occupation for the recovery of lost power, of a fitness degraded by a fall... Ascension is imagined against falling and light against shadows... Light has the tendency to become a lightning bolt or sword and ascension to trample the defeated adversary.”

Many aspects of the paranoiac imagination and its delusional transformations appears to draw on this register of confrontation and struggle, of fanatical combativeness and ab solute and totalizing idealism.

On the Paranoiac “Imaginary World”

Paranoid delusions, in their thematic multiplicity and their stark and undeniable formal homology, pose a major phenomenological problem. Even the most acute analysts and psychopathologists all appear to align themselves with an approach that could be defined essentially as behavioral, when they delineate the imaginary world of paranoiacs. The au tors concentrate mainly on the tenacious and fanatical combativeness of the paranoiac, underlining above all the typical behaviors of querulous mania, implacable intolerance, antagonistic grandiosity, a particular aggressiveness that frequently culminates in unpre dictable “escalation to action.” As already seen, the paranoiac has also been convincingly defined by Serieux and Capgras (1902 ) as “delusion in action.” More recently Racamier (1966 ) spoke of paranoiacs in terms of “ghostly silence.”

Paranoia

What we do know is that paranoid delusions are those that undergo the longest and most complex incubation. Tanzi states: “As regards the internal elaboration of their delusions, paranoiacs do not usually recount these to anyone, because pride in their beliefs makes them unwilling to reveal their shadows.”

Paranoiacs, in terms of both pathological personality and delusional phenomenology, ap pears to be distinguished by the unusual aridity of their imaginary world. Is this aridity genuine? Or a dissimulation that draws a curtain of reticence around the imaginary world?

In the face of this enigma there are numerous questions that phenomenologists can and must ask themselves, and there are many paths that they need to follow in order to seek answers. For example, an effort might be made to establish what fantasy is hidden behind the apparent aridity of a querulous manic behavior. It appears likely that there would be a highly articulated imaginary world around the issue of justice, a unique phantom of jus ice, a particularly radical form of idealization of the law. And one might query: what as Acetic and chivalrous dream lies behind an erotomanic delusion? Or what dazzling mythol ogizing complexity is hidden in the core of a genealogical delusion? And so on...

A phenomenology of inner life should be able to grasp the anthropological aspect of a delusional development with all its latent narrative and communicative possibilities.

However, neither traditional psychiatry nor psychoanalysis have provided answers to any of these questions, though fundamental from a psychopathological phenomenological per spective.

In reality, only an interpretation of the imaginary world and some if its recurrent metaphors could illuminate certain paranoid behaviors (querulous manic and others, in Eluding those with “escalation to action”), which so often appear unpredictable and ibex pliable.

(p. 779) Cargnello adopts this approach in the analysis of the case of Ernst Wagner, “the paranoiac exterminator,” and manages to open a crack into his megalomaniac imaginary world through an analysis of his drama Hahn (Delusion), which remained unpublished in Italy for many years, only emerging in 1984 as an appendix to Cargnello’s essay. The sec ond act of Hahn in particular allows us to uncover the secret nucleus of the paranoid na Cure of the author.

As Cargnello specifies, the epiphany of unconfined grandiosity and unlimited power ap pears when the protagonist of the play, the paranoiac Ludwig, identifies himself with the grandiose historical figure of Nebuchadnezzar and his megalomaniac fantasies of domain ion and “Gulliverization” of the world.

Cargnello’s phenomenological analysis insightfully recalls the considerations of E. Canetti on the relationship between paranoia and power, and focuses very revealingly on Paranoia the paranoiac imagination of E. Wagner, which provides some access to the background to his exterminator gesture.

The Ernst Wagner Case On the eve of the First World War an obscure primary school teacher, Ernst Wagner, com Fitted a double atrocity: he stabbed his wife and four young children to death in their sleep, and then went into the town where he had taught a long time previously, Muhlhausen. Here he set a large number of houses on fire and killed nine inhabitants with his pistol while wounding various others more or less seriously.

This massacre was not the result of a sudden madness, but instead the conclusion of a plan for revenge that had gradually been developing over a period of more than ten years. He was convinced that a sin he committed (libidinous deeds with animals) was written on his face and that everybody was aware of his secret unnatural habits. Soon the suspicion of being persecuted, first by some and then by all the inhabitants of the town transformed into certainty and ultimately in fanatical, intransigent conviction. He decided to avenge himself for this.

Quickly recognized as mentally ill and committed for life to a mental asylum, he became the subject of incessant study by a great clinical therapist of the times, Robert Gaupp, who defined him as paranoiac, dedicating much of his research work to the case. Ever since, this famous case has been widely discussed in central European psychiatric treatises, even the most recent.

Ernst Wagner was well-educated and highly intelligent. Above all he had a very high con caption of self: a writer since his early years, little by little he ended up proclaiming him self the greatest living German playwright. In his final years there emerged a typical querulous manic delusion, focused on the writer F. Werfel, who he accused of having pla giarized important parts of his work. The dispute even had judicial developments.

Among his works certainly the most outstanding is the play Hahn (Delusion), composed in 1921, but published in a scientific monograph only in 1968. With obvious identification between the author and the main protagonist, the plot traces out the affairs of King Lud wig second of Bavaria, who committed suicide by drowning. It is an extraordinary example of literary “staging” of madness, and the play is a unique document in psychiatric case stud ies through (p. 780) the ages: it had never previously happened that a person affected by a delusion of persecution and grandeur described, with undeniable precision and depth, an other case of delusional persecution and grandeur.

As Cargnello writes, “there is no question that in Ernst Wagner’s work delusion becomes “drama” or rather “tragedy”: no longer merely a clinical manifestation, but an oppressive or even tragic expression of how essentially deficient or distorted interpersonal relations are expressed.... Only exceptionally authentic documents, like those provided by the di Paranoia ary annotations of Strindberg, or the play Wuhan by Ernst Wagner give us an idea of what the experience of a delusional existence really means.”

In his essay dedicated to this play, D. Cargnello, in addition to providing an unsurpassable profile of the paranoiac world that we in turn are trying to track down, he also believed he had revealed this passionate interweaving of madness and literature.

The essay can be read and interpreted on at least three levels: 1) The play Hahn (Delusion), unknown to the public and known only to a narrow cir cle of specialists and refined experts on the great German tradition of psychopatholo gy, including among others Danilo Cargnello.

2) The biography of E. Wagner, the paranoid playwright and author of this extraordi nary text, which offers a dramatically personal interpretation of the delusional exp rience of the author reflected in the protagonist of the play, the paranoiac and suici dal Ludwig of Bavaria. The story of E. Wagner is also closely interwoven with the his Cory of psychopathology and in particular with the definition of the concept of “para nova,” to the point that the term “Gaupp’s Paranoia” is used with reference to Gaupp, a psychiatrist and expert on Wagner, whose case he studied throughout his life.

3) The third and most important level is D. Cargnello’s illuminating commentary, which attempts to reconstruct, through rare period documents and enthusiastic analyses of the text of the play, a phenomenological profile of paranoia.

There are numerous possible connections between these levels of interpretation, with the text containing multiple metalevels, but certainly the most important is the possibility of seeing the drama of the madness of Ludwig of Bavaria through the eyes and interpret son of the paranoiac Wagner, who serves as a sort of reflecting conscience for the protag Monist of the play, the paranoiac Ludwig.

E. Wagner described his work as follows: The play Delusion could only have been written by me. One who has seen all infer nos and horrors.... I too have been to hell, in the center of the hottest of the fiery pits. For this reason in the play I talk of one who, even if seated high on a throne, is nevertheless a companion in suffering. He lived in equal torment and damn son! Drama of lived experienced? Yes. Drama of destiny? Yes.... I dissociative identity disorder not write lightly but with seriousness, with bleeding seriousness. Anyone who reads me must know this.

This extraordinary overlap between the author’s world and the world of his character in Educes Cargnello to speak of a “human document unique in its kind. In it a victim of deli signal persecution-grandeur speaks of another victim of persecution-grandeur. A para noiac describing somebody he considers to be paranoiac!”

(p. 781) The Wagner/Ludwig reflection represents the prototype for all the reflections and symmetries that emerge within the play. Fundamental among the proliferation of Ludwig’s “doubles” are the secular transpositions of Ludwig/Frederick of Prussia and Paranoia Ludwig/Nebuchadnezzar, delusional incarnations of two extreme poles, between which the psychological structure of paranoia oscillates: persecutor phase and megalomaniacal phase. “Persecutor delusion and delusion of grandeur,” says a character in the play, “they usually appear together. They are like the sound and its echo, like the object and its reflected image, like the backwards and forwards of a pendulum... ”

Wagner also adds, through the figure of the psychiatrist in his appearance in the third act, that “the delusion of persecution is the face and the essence / the delusion of grandeur is the mask and the appearance ” (third, 2). Here the author’s phenomenological analysis reveals the modality of the dialectic between persecutor phase and megaloma niacal phase, the hinge of which, binding and keeping the two poles together, according to Cargnello is a profound modification that occurred in the existential structure of the With-Being ( Mit-Daises ).

Picking up on Binswanger’s observations described in Schizophrenia, Cargnello sustains that when the world of peers ( Mit-Welt ), represented in the play by the King of Prussia, becomes oppositional, humiliating, and distressing, then the Being attempts to abandon this world to take refuge in its “own” world ( Eigen-Welt ) which, in contrast to the lowness of humiliation, rises up to the heights of megalomaniacal grandiosity.

Nevertheless, the attempt to abandon the world of peers is always a failure since, as Hei dagger teaches, the With-Being is an inescapable structure of Being: hiding in a personal world, in terms of both physical isolation and in terms of increasing delusional rigidity and consequent break down of dialogical communication with the Other, is always a case of coexistence, defective as it may be, and it can never be an existence outside of coexistence. Otherwise stated, isolation only exists in reference to those from whom isola son is desired and, precisely on the strength of this relation, the others are in all cases present within the isolation in the defective manner of being at a distance. So, Ludwig/ Nebuchadnezzar is such only as a grandiose and solipsistic mask, contrasting with the persecutor dialectic Ludwig/Frederick of Prussia. The grandiose identification only ex sits in reference to the persecutor anxiety and right from the start this thwarts the aim of the megalomaniacal narcissistic identification of Ludwig with Nebuchadnezzar. It is precisely because Ludwig/Nebuchadnezzar cannot exist without Ludwig/Frederick of Prussia that the persecutor phase and megalomaniacal phase are intrinsically tied to each other, the second as echo and response to the existential intention of the first.

Structured as symmetrical and unstable counterpositions, that dramatize the counterposi sons between Ludwig’s two main “doubles,” the persecutor and the megalomaniacal, the text concludes with the suicide of the protagonist, a suicide that expresses the final resolution of the two antagonistic forces in play. This appears to occur at the moment in which megalomania and persecution merge into a single gesture, that of suicide, the only gesture of defeat that can be transformed by megalomaniacal idealization.

As Balzac wrote in “Lost Illusions,” “suicide is the effect of a feeling that might be called, if you like, self esteem in order not to confuse it with the word honor. The day in which a man disdains of himself, the moment in which the reality of life contrasts with his hopes Paranoia he kills himself, thus rendering homage to the society in the face of which he does not want to remain stripped of his virtues and splendor.”

(p. 782) At an extreme point in his development the defensive position of paranoia, hinged on narcissistic grandeur, can implode into psychosis, through the uncovering of an ire mediable loss of self esteem, in the encounter with one’s own Ego irremediably injured in honor, impoverished, and stripped of every illusion. And the moment of the secular en counter with the self is the mortal confrontation with one’s own incurable imperfection. Now the mirror remains the final object. The final medium that reflects a shame and im perfection that can no longer be avoided. So the figure reflected back from the surface of the mirror presents itself as a double or twin that we do not like and do not love and which, symmetrically does not love us. Here appears the image of the twin “enemy”, and the mirror becomes the medium for a relationship with one’s own Ego charged with violence and death, like the theater of an implacable duel with our own lookalike-enemy. In this case the secular double inevitably transforms into a “persecute ry double.” The poet George Trail expressed the latent persecutor nature of the “secular double” and the twin enemy as: “From the illusory void of a mirror, / slow and uncertain, / from darkness and horror / emerges a face: Cain! / Imperceptible rustle of the curtain, / from the window the Moon looks into a void / I remain alone with my assassin.”

This is also the psychotic theme analyzed by Otto Rank in literature and folklore: the autonomization of the secular alter ego. The recurrent theme analyzed by Rank is that of the appearance of a double which can equally be a secular image or shadow, which suddenly becomes autonomous and persecutes the protagonist, establishing a total and unchallenged dominion over him. The story can end in a duel in which protagonist kills the double and finds himself mortally wounded. Or it might happen that the double, as in the novel of the same name by Dostoevsky, takes over the identity of the protago inst driving him mad, behaving, in the author’s own words, “like a burning mirror.” Or, as in the play Delusion, it happens that the lookalike-enemy, identifiable in the portrait-mir ror of the Prince of Prussia that looms in persecution over every scene, drives the protag Monist Ludwig to suicide.

The relationship of reflection/identification between Ludwig and Frederick of Prussia, al ways present on the scene as a large portrait with which Ludwig constantly dialogues, thus presents itself as an implacable struggle between Quelling/lookalikes which con Eludes, as in the mythology of the double, in the suicide of the protagonist. The grandiose paranoiac shell worn like armor by the character Ludwig, expressed in ambitious fan tastes of ascension (refuge in his high castles) and of omnipotent control over the world (the delusional transformation into the figure of Nebuchadnezzar, autocrat and warrior), should be considered as the extreme refuge from persecutor dread, the extreme megalo maniacal effort to escape the symmetrical violence of one’s own double.

The operation is delusional and governed by the principle of the instability of the roles, and so does not succeed. It is thrown back hyperbolically amplified onto the protagonist Paranoia who ends up subjected to the law of “an eye for an eye” advanced and triggered by his own megalomaniacal violence. He becomes, so to speak, the sacrificial victim.

E. Wagner’s play appears to stage the tragic contest of paranoia in the most direct way: that of the unstable reversibility of roles. Ludwig’s encounter with the portrait-mirror of the Prince of Prussia puts into motion an oscillating movement of persecutor dread and megalomaniacal retaliation that culminates in a grandiose fantasy of revenge and de struction of his eternal enemy/persecutor, the Prussian Prince.

The megalomaniacal apex is reached in the delusional creation of another mirror image of the protagonist, that of Nebuchadnezzar, and in the hallucinatory fantasy of dominion over a world governed from above, “Gulliverized” and magically manipulable. As Cargnel lo (p. 783) writes, “the epiphany of unconfined grandiosity and unlimited power appears when Nebuchadnezzar comes onto the scene (or rather Ludwig disguised as Nebuchad 3 nezzar), transformed by his illusions of grandeur.”

However, the unstable oscillating game of the two figures of the paranoia, a game of end lessly rising stakes, contains within it, within its definition, a possible exit from its hyper Colic track: the final challenge, the final victory, and the final megalomaniacal disguise to face the persecutor challenge appears to be suicide. We can try asking ourselves why.

Suicide appears to be a sort of short-circuit between the two poles of the reflection: per secured and persecutor end up reciprocally catching each other, merging into a single en sty, that of the suicidal figure, thus repeating the path defined in the mythology of the “double.” As already seen, in the duel with his lookalike the protagonist always finds him self mortally wounded.

In the mythology of the “double” we find a prefiguration of one of the latent psychopath logical expressions of paranoia, its suicidal expression.

The Metaphor of the Court of Law in a Case of # Querulous Mania In a case of querulous mania-type paranoia that came under our observation, it was poss ble to identify the two antagonistic and secular figures of the paranoid world: persecu son and grandeur. This patient gave us insight into the surprising imaginary background to a behavior typical of querulous mania (linked to themes of entitlement in the division of a hypothetical inheritance). Only through extended observation was it possible to identify an extensive multifocal delusion of which the querulous mania represented the culminate ing manifestation.

This case appeared to answer an exquisitely phenomenological question that we had al ready asked ourselves: what singular phantom of justice is hidden behind the apparent aridity of querulous manic behavior?

Paranoia

The world of patient S. appeared to be organized around a grandiose scenic “metaphor” that shone a beam of light into his internal world and on his structures of meaning. One typos of his imaginary world was the Court of Law.

During one interview the patient S. provided a distressing and visionary image of the court and the rituals celebrated there, depicting a place more metaphysical than real, a context that evoked simultaneously the altar and the gallows. The following is an extract from the transcription of S. referring to the picture he had invented of the court and the trial.

The most important event that can be staged in a courtroom is a trial. In this case the mundane routine work that distinguishes much of the court’s activity is elevate ed and becomes a rite. It (p. 784) is a rite of roles and opposing strategies: on one side is the counsel for the prosecution, on the other the counsel for the defense.

The scene is awe-inspiring. In the center of the predella is the court judge, who can transform when required into executioner. Seated to his right are the Harris Hers nominated by the court, dressed in capes and military style headgear. To his left is the court disposed in balconies. Before him, sometimes shielded with a grid, are the accused. There is frequent altercation: the opposite parties spy on each other, study each other’s moves, offend each other. This makes the trial a tense struggle requiring a large room with numerous bolt holes represented by the sur rounding rooms and passages. The trial is distinct from other rituals of public life because there is always a guilty party who for justice or destiny, is also always condemned.

What we see is a grandiose counterphobic fantasy, used by S. to subtract himself from the persecutor risk of identification with the guilty party (“who for justice or destiny, is also always condemned”). The patient identified the court as the ideal place for the transfer of both his grandiose vengefulness and his latent persecutor anxiety.

His stenographic reconstruction, which resembles an altarpiece, is dominated by a sym metrical pyramidal structure, the vertex of which is represented by the solemn figure of a judge, “who can transform when required into executioner. Seated to his right are the barristers elected by the court, dressed in capes and military style headgear. To his left is the court disposed in balconies. Before him, sometimes shielded with a grid, are the ac used.”

This petrified paranoid stenography is imbued with signs of anxiety and suspicion that compromise its rigorous symmetry. In this room, says S., there are “numerous bolt holes represented by the surrounding rooms and passages.” These passages and escape routes, 4 are the stenographic rendering of the persecutor anxiety of S.

In reality, in the trial celebrated in this courtroom, de re tua agitur.

Paranoia

The subtle persecutor atmosphere perceived in the courtroom stenography is emblemat ically summed up in S.’s final words. “The judge can transform when required into exec toner” and “the accused, for justice or destiny, is also always condemned.”

The Chance and Destiny evoked by S. as factors that loom indecipherable over the out come of the trial, also represent the ultimate and most uncontrollable risk to which the two protagonists in the trial are exposed, the judge and the accused. The pair of opp sites, by Chance, or Destiny can always invert in polarity: the judge can become the ac used, the executioner can transform into the executed. This is the source of the sinister unease that circulates in the court during the enigmatic trial.

There is a symmetrical and reversible relationship between punished and punished. In re laity Chance and Destiny pair the two opposing figures of the courtroom in a sort of “ma Sign symmetry” that implies the possible reversibility of the roles. The two figures that represent the persecutor and megalomaniacal aspects of the paranoid world are fatally bonded together. They are “like a sound and its echo, like an object and its reflected im age, like the backwards and forwards of a pendulum...,” to repeat the words cited by Danilo Cargnello (p. 785) regarding the Wagner case. Looking closely, the opposing and secular figures of the judge and the accused present the psychopathological theme of the “double” as persecutor lookalike. Within the logic of the “double,” the judge has always also been the accused, and the punished has always been destined to be punished.

This inescapable truth, beyond any illusionistic play on opposites, is revealed down to the smallest details in a short story by Kafka (“In the Penal Colony” ), which can almost be considered the model parable for paranoiac existence. This story tells of a torture in strument which is also a capital punishment machine. It is designed like a hoeing device and with countless needles it carves the reason for the condemnation into the body of the condemned, before stabbing him to death. The accused only learns toward the end of his torment, like a revelation, the commandment that he has infringed.

At the end of the story the official and custodian of the machine, who is also judge and ex ecutioner, condemns himself to its judgment in order to illustrate its exemplary operation. The commandment that the executioner has carved into his back is: “Be just!”

The conclusion of the Kafkian parable lies in the final description of the lifeless body of the official: “He remained as he had been in life; there was not the minimal sign of the promised redemption; what all the others had found in the machine, the official had not found... ”

Every expectation of redemption and catharsis that the official, like a paranoiac, invested in the justice system, here finds its definitive failure, a failure that we would define as on tological. As Cargnello underlines, in delusion “the presence no longer develops, it can only turn in and torment itself... without a true tomorrow, without a true future, re Educed as it is to an eternal, sterile, and, above all, inauthentic repetition.”

Paranoia

Paranoia: Prognosis or Destiny?

The crucial question we posed is as follows: can the paranoid style of existence, in its repetitiveness, its faithfulness to delusional “truth,” converge with the concept of “des tiny”? And how distant (or close) is this word from the lexical meaning of prognostic in evitability?

Anthropo-analytic psychopathology cuts dazzlingly right across all the clinical-nosograph ic tradition of Kraepelinian memory, the latter fixated on the iron hard and reductive con Dept of “prognostic destiny,” but in its way paying homage to “destiny” as such, paying its debt to “destiny,” through the key concepts of “anthropological disproportion” (Binswanger), of “disanimating omnipotence”, of “failed existence”, as markers of a specific anthropological style.

The Danish philosopher S. Kierkegaard (1844, 1849 ) anticipated and clarified in an in credible conceptual synthesis the two key concepts underlined above, “disanimating om nipotence” and “anthropological disproportion.” In two extraordinary essays (“The Con Dept of Anxiety” and “The Mortal Illness” ), he analyzed the risks faced by a subjectivity enclosed within an abstract omnipotence, in a project of self that provides neither conditioning nor limits. This anthropological disproportion frustrates the Ego, which disappears into the enforced repetition of its own implacable certainties.

(p. 786) Kierkegaard (1849: 244) calls this rigid model of existence, so fixed in its certain ties, the “mortal illness ”: The Ego desperately wants to enjoy the satisfaction of being its own self creator, of developing itself, of being itself, it wants to have the glory of this plan... of the sovereign project according to which it has defined itself... and this is precisely the final moment at which a fully intact individual becomes a mirage.

Retracing Kierkegaard’s thesis in his own way, Binswanger states that paranoid existence is one that “holds on anxiously to its singularity,” pursuing it beyond any possible Bela tionship with the other. Striving to live for its own singularity, the existence necessarily fails, or as he writes, “the existence eliminates the ground that gives it substance.”

The risk that these existences lose their way along certain hazardous passages of their anthropological journey in some cases reaches the high probability of a clinical prognosis, and in the view of the authors this determines the unfortunate destiny of paranoia and justifies our hopes for the predictive resources of phenomenological psychopathology.

Paranoia

Acknowledgments A special thanks to the psychiatry residents of the School of Bologna, F. Cerrato, R. Emil Bani, L. Gammino, P. Lupoli, S.Valence, and E. Volta, who have built, around the theme of paranoia, a passionate “laboratory” of psychopathological thought.

Bibliography American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM-third. Washington D.C.: American Psychiatric Association. American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM-third—R. Washington D.C.: American Psychiatric Association. American Psychiatric Association.. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM-fourth. Washington D.C.: American Psychiatric Association. American Psychiatric Association., Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM-fifth. Washington D.C.: American Psychiatric Association. Ballerina A. and Ross Mons M.. La vergogna e il delirio: un modello Belle sindromi paranoidee. Torino: Bollati Boringhieri. Balzac H.. Illusion permute. Milan: Garzanti. Binswanger L.. Drew Foremen Missglückten Daseins. Tübingen: Max Nieneyer, Ver lag. Binswanger L.. “User Phanomenologie. Ztschr.” Ges. Near. Psychiatry 82,10, 1923. Trad. It.: Sulla fenomenologia in: Per un’Antropologia Fenomenologica, Feltrinelli, Mi Kano, 1982 Bocchi G. and Cerruti M. (a Aura di). La sfida Bella complessità. Milan: Feltrinelli. Callieri B. and Mas C.. Paranoia—passion e ragione. Coma: Alicia. Canetti E.. Maze und Mast. Hamburg: Claassen Verlag, 1960. Trans. Lassa e potere. Milan: Rizzoli. Cargnello D.. Il capo Ernst Wagner. Milan: Feltrinelli. Claude H. and Montassut M.. “Delimitation de la paranoia legitime.” Encephale 1: 63. (p. 787) Clerambault (De) G.. “Desires passionels: erotomanie, revendication, jalousie” Bull. Soc. Olin. Med. Bent. 61, 71. Deltas F. A.. “Le role et l’importance des constitutions en psychopathologie” Con grès Alien. Neural., Limoges.

Paranoia

Dilthey W.. “Einleitung In Die Geisteswissenschaften.” In Gesammelte Schriften. Vol. I. Leipzig: Teubner. Trans. Introduzione Mlle science Cello spirit. Firenze: La Nova Italic.

Duran G.. Les structures anthropologiques de l’Imaginaire Paris: Presses Univer sitaires de France. Trans. Le structure antropologiche dell’Immaginario. Kari: Pedalo, 1972.

Eidelberg L.. An Outline of a Comparative Pathology of the Neuroses. Trans. Pa tologia comparata Belle nevrosi. Firenze: Einaudi, 1959.

Ey H. and Pujol R.. “Troupe des Délires chroniques.” Encycl. Méd.Cheer., Psychic Brie, 37299 D 10, 10, Paris.

Ferric C.. Trattato di Psichiatria Clinic e Forense. Torino: UTET.

Gadamer H. G.. Wahrheit und Method. Grundzüge Diner philosophischen Hermeneutik. Tübingen: Bohr. Trans. Merità e metodo. Lineament di un’ermeneutica filosofica. Milan: Bompiani, 1983.

Gaupp R.. “Zur Lehre von der Paranoia” Nervenartz XVIII: 167.

Genie-Perrin G.. Les paranoiaques. Paris: Malone.

Gerard R.. La Violence et le Sacré. Paris: Editions Bernard Grassé. Trans. La violin za e il Macro. Milan: Adelphi, 1980.

Heidegger M.. San und Zit. Tübingen: Max Niemejer. Trans. Essene e Tempo. Torino: UTET, 1969.

Husserl H.. Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen. Philosophic. Estes Bus: Allgemeine Einführung in die Heine Phänomenologie. Trans. Idle per una fenomenologia Aura e per una filosofia fenomenologica. Torino: Einaudi, 1976.

Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. Berlin, Gottingen, Heidelberg: Stringer- Verlag. Trans. Psicopatologia Generate. Coma: Il Pensiero Scientific, 1964.

Kafka F.. “ In der Strafkolonie ” Lipsia: Wolff. Trans. “Bella colonial penile.” In Rac conch. Torino: Frassinelli, 1949.

Kafka F.: “ Der Process. ” Berlin: Schocken Verlag. Trans. “Il process.” Torino: Frassinelli, 1963.

Kehrer F. A.. “Kristische Bemerkungen zum Paranoia-Problem.” Nervenartz 22: 121.

Paranoia Kierkegaard S.. Begrebet Ingest. En impel psychologist-paapegende Overveielse i Renting af det dogmatiske Problem om Arvesynden. Trans. Il concerto dell’angoscia. Mi Kano: SE, 2007. Kierkegaard S.. Sygdommen til Døden. Kleist (Von) H.. Michael Kohlaas. Milan: Rizzoli. Kohut H.. The Analysis of the Self. London: Hogarth Press. Trans. Narcisismo e Analisi del Sé. Torino: Boringhieri, 1976. Kohut H.. The Search for the Self. New York: International Universities Press. Trans. La Ricerca del Sé. Torino: Boringhieri, 1982. Koryè A.. Newtonian Studies. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. Kraepelin E.. Leherbuch der Psychiatric. Leipzig: Joh. Ambros. Barth. Franz H.. “Die schizoid Fehlhaltung.” In Frank, von Gebsattel, and Schultz (eating disorders.), Handbuch der Neurosenlehre und Psychotherapies. Munched: Urban-Schwarzen berg. Kretschmer E.. Medizinische Psychologies. Stuttgart: Theme. Trans. Manual teori co pratico di Psicologia Media. Firenze; Sansoni, 1952.

(p. 788) Lantern-Laura G., Del Pistoia L., and Bel Habit H.. “Paranoia.” Encycl. Méd.Cheer., Psychiatric, 37299 D 10, 10, Paris, 1985. Morin E.. “Le vie Bella complessità.” In La sfida Bella complessità, pp. 49–60. A cu ra di G. Bocchi e M. Cerruti. Milan: Feltrinelli. Muscatello C. F.. “Percorsi psicopatologici del narcisismo.” Riv. Per. Freniat., 108: 1299. Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Inglese S., Ravani C., and Pardi G. “Note per una Genome nologia Belle personalityà paranoicali—I parch.” Riv. Per. Wren., 104: 841. Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Ravani C., and Pardi G.. “La paranoia fra struttura di personalityà e sintomo.” Ats del XXXVI Congress Bella S.I.P., Milan. Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Ravani C., and Bologna M. (1985a). “Figure del Regime Di Arno dell’immaginario: L ’immaginario paranoicale.” Ats del XXXVI Congress Bella S.I.P., Milan. Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Ravani C., and Bologna M. (1985b). “Considerazioni Sulla paranoia in marine al drama ‘Hahn’ di E. Wagner.” Ats del XXXVI Congress Bella S.I.P., Milan.

Paranoia Kierkegaard S.. Begrebet Ingest. En impel psychologist-paapegende Overveielse i Renting af det dogmatiske Problem om Arvesynden. Trans. Il concerto dell’angoscia. Mi Kano: SE, 2007. Kierkegaard S.. Sygdommen til Døden. Kleist (Von) H.. Michael Kohlaas. Milan: Rizzoli. Kohut H.. The Analysis of the Self. London: Hogarth Press. Trans. Narcisismo e Analisi del Sé. Torino: Boringhieri, 1976. Kohut H.. The Search for the Self. New York: International Universities Press. Trans. La Ricerca del Sé. Torino: Boringhieri, 1982. Koryè A.. Newtonian Studies. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. Kraepelin E.. Leherbuch der Psychiatric. Leipzig: Joh. Ambros. Barth. Franz H.. “Die schizoid Fehlhaltung.” In Frank, von Gebsattel, and Schultz (eating disorders.), Handbuch der Neurosenlehre und Psychotherapies. Munched: Urban-Schwarzen berg. Kretschmer E.. Medizinische Psychologies. Stuttgart: Theme. Trans. Manual teori co pratico di Psicologia Media. Firenze; Sansoni, 1952.

(p. 788) Lantern-Laura G., Del Pistoia L., and Bel Habit H.. “Paranoia.” Encycl. Méd.Cheer., Psychiatric, 37299 D 10, 10, Paris, 1985. Morin E.. “Le vie Bella complessità.” In La sfida Bella complessità, pp. 49–60. A cu ra di G. Bocchi e M. Cerruti. Milan: Feltrinelli. Muscatello C. F.. “Percorsi psicopatologici del narcisismo.” Riv. Per. Freniat., 108: 1299. Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Inglese S., Ravani C., and Pardi G. “Note per una Genome nologia Belle personalityà paranoicali—I parch.” Riv. Per. Wren., 104: 841. Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Ravani C., and Pardi G.. “La paranoia fra struttura di personalityà e sintomo.” Ats del XXXVI Congress Bella S.I.P., Milan. Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Ravani C., and Bologna M. (1985a). “Figure del Regime Di Arno dell’immaginario: L ’immaginario paranoicale.” Ats del XXXVI Congress Bella S.I.P., Milan. Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Ravani C., and Bologna M. (1985b). “Considerazioni Sulla paranoia in marine al drama ‘Hahn’ di E. Wagner.” Ats del XXXVI Congress Bella S.I.P., Milan.

Paranoia Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Ravani C., and Bologna M.. “Note per una Genome nologia Belle personalityà paranoicali. Aspetti dell’immaginario paranoicale—second parch.” Riv. Per. Wren. CXI: 48. Muscatello C. F. and Scudellari P.. Figure del narcisismo. La metafora del fore e le sue metamorfosi grafiche in un capo di anoressia mental. Castrovillari: TEDA Editrice. Muscatello C. F. and Scudellari P.. “Prognosis e destine. Comprensione narrative e predittività deli evens psicopatologici.” Comprendere 8: 115–124. Yacht S. and Racamier P. C.. “La Théorie psychanalytique du délire.” Rev. Franc. Pschoan., XXV (Quill.–October): 4–5. Racamier P.. “Esquisse d’une clinique psychanalytique de la paranoia.” Rev. Franc. Psychoan. 30: 125. Rank O.. “ Der DoppelgäAnger. ” Imago, Leipzig, Wain. Ricoeur P.. Le conflict des l’interprèCation. Paris: Editions du Seuil. Trans. La sfida semeiologica. Coma: Armando, 1974. Ricoeur P.. Du text à l’action. Paris: Editions du Seuil. Trans. Dal Pesto all’azione. Milan: Jana Book, 1989. Ross Mons M.. La conoscenza total, Paranoia, Scienza e Pseudo-scienza. Coma: Fioriti. Sauget H.. “Névroses de caratère. Caratères névrotiques.” Encycl. Méd. Cheer., Psychiatric, 37320 A 10, I0, Paris. Schultz J. H.. Grundfragen der Neurosenlehre. Stuttgart: Theme. Serieux P. and Capgras K. (mai-Quin I902). “Les psychoses à base d’interpretations deli antes.” Ann. Méd. Psycho. Tanzi E. and Lugaro E.. Trattato Belle malattie mental, 2nd edn. Milan: Sovietà Editrice Librarian. Tatossian A.. La phénoménologie des psychoses. Paris: Mason. Trans. La Genome nologia Belle psicosi. Coma: Fioriti, 2003. Trail G.. “Die Dichtungen.” Notes: 1 ( ) For a detailed critical review of the concept of paranoia and the problems that it raises see Lantern-Laura, Del Pistoia, and Bel Habit.

Paranoia Muscatello C. F., Scudellari P., Ravani C., and Bologna M.. “Note per una Genome nologia Belle personalityà paranoicali. Aspetti dell’immaginario paranoicale—second parch.” Riv. Per. Wren. CXI: 48. Muscatello C. F. and Scudellari P.. Figure del narcisismo. La metafora del fore e le sue metamorfosi grafiche in un capo di anoressia mental. Castrovillari: TEDA Editrice. Muscatello C. F. and Scudellari P.. “Prognosis e destine. Comprensione narrative e predittività deli evens psicopatologici.” Comprendere 8: 115–124. Yacht S. and Racamier P. C.. “La Théorie psychanalytique du délire.” Rev. Franc. Pschoan., XXV (Quill.–October): 4–5. Racamier P.. “Esquisse d’une clinique psychanalytique de la paranoia.” Rev. Franc. Psychoan. 30: 125. Rank O.. “ Der DoppelgäAnger. ” Imago, Leipzig, Wain. Ricoeur P.. Le conflict des l’interprèCation. Paris: Editions du Seuil. Trans. La sfida semeiologica. Coma: Armando, 1974. Ricoeur P.. Du text à l’action. Paris: Editions du Seuil. Trans. Dal Pesto all’azione. Milan: Jana Book, 1989. Ross Mons M.. La conoscenza total, Paranoia, Scienza e Pseudo-scienza. Coma: Fioriti. Sauget H.. “Névroses de caratère. Caratères névrotiques.” Encycl. Méd. Cheer., Psychiatric, 37320 A 10, I0, Paris. Schultz J. H.. Grundfragen der Neurosenlehre. Stuttgart: Theme. Serieux P. and Capgras K. (mai-Quin I902). “Les psychoses à base d’interpretations deli antes.” Ann. Méd. Psycho. Tanzi E. and Lugaro E.. Trattato Belle malattie mental, 2nd edn. Milan: Sovietà Editrice Librarian. Tatossian A.. La phénoménologie des psychoses. Paris: Mason. Trans. La Genome nologia Belle psicosi. Coma: Fioriti, 2003. Trail G.. “Die Dichtungen.” Notes: 1 ( ) For a detailed critical review of the concept of paranoia and the problems that it raises see Lantern-Laura, Del Pistoia, and Bel Habit.

Paranoia

2 ( ) Hypersensitivity to offenses (the so-called “asthenic pole”) is the common trait, ac cording to Kretschmer, of these personological structures, and this very particular sus ceptibility stimulates pathologically aggressive reactions (the “sthenic pole”), with di verse clinical expressions (querulous delusion, delusional jealousy, erotomanic delusion). The combination in different proportions of these topological characteristics leads to “delusional sensitivity developments” (self-referential delusions of a persecutor nature) or “grandiose developments” (including the classic querulous delusion).

3 ( ) The world of Nebuchadnezzar appears to condense in particular scenic metaphors of power and control. These are: the statue of Fame, which grips a bunch of glittering threads that radiate out over the world; a megaphone that amplifies and spreads the sovereign’s commands everywhere; a movable mirror that like the lens of a telescope al lows visual inspection of every corner of the world. The extreme control exercised by these instruments coincides with a sort of miniaturization of the world which renders gi antic the sovereign power of the one who controls it. This is the “Gulliverization” effect implicit in certain visual fantasies of dominion.

4 ( ) Following Kafka (“The Trial,” 1935) the trial has also become a literary typos. In one of the chasms of the court building in which the protagonist is to be tried is the studio of the painter Titorelli, specialized in portraits of judges. Here in the eyes of the protagonist Josef K., the Goddess of Justice depicted in a large canvas undergoes a slow metamorpho sis, transforming into the Goddess of the Hunt. The trial is thus the place where the God Bess of Justice is deformed by the wildest and most persecutor arbitrariness that trans forms her into an enigmatic Goddess of the Hunt.

Polo Scudellari Department of Psychiatry, University of Bologna Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomena logical Context Matthew Radcliffe The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article explores the phenomenology of auditory verbal hallucinations (AVHs), while also stressing the indispensability of phenomenological research to a wider understand ing of these phenomena. I begin by making clear that the kinds of experience routinely la bled as “AVHs” are diverse and that many of them are not at all like hearing someone speak. I then note that AVHs in psychiatric illness are usually embedded in much widerranging phenomenological disturbances. Recent work in phenomenological psychopathol ogy has sought to characterize these disturbances in terms of a type of schizophrenia-spe civic self-disorder. I offer several criticisms of this view. Next, I contrast the self-disorder account with an approach associated with the Hearing Voices Movement, according to which AVHs originate in traumatic experiences and are not to be labeled as symptoms of schizophrenia. By drawing on work by Wolfgang Blankenburg, I conclude by briefly sketching how these two approaches might be reconciled.

Keywords: auditory verbal hallucination, phenomenology, self-disorder, schizophrenia, trauma # Introduction AUDITORY verbal hallucinations (hereafter, AVHs) are frequently associated with schizo phrenia diagnoses but also occur in several other psychiatric conditions, as well as in the non-clinical population. In order to investigate how they are caused and how they might be treated (if they require treatment), it is essential to get the phenomenology right. Oth erwise, there is a risk of failing to distinguish different experiences that need to be ex pained in different ways or even seeking to explain the wrong thing entirely, a point that applies equally to treatment. This is not to suggest that we need rely exclusively on phe nomenological research in order to pin down the nature of AVHs. We can also draw on non-phenomenological findings in order to corroborate, clarify, or challenge phenomena logical claims. For example, suppose it is assumed that AVHs are much like veridical Audi Cory experiences, but it then turns out that patterns of brain activity associated with Audi Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context son are entirely absent. In such a scenario, non-phenomenological findings would prompt us to reconsider the phenomenology.

However, where AVHs are concerned, one might think that the required phenomenology cal work is easily done. The term “auditory verbal hallucination” already says it all: a hal lucination is an experience that resembles perception in one or another sensory modality, but which occurs in the absence of an appropriate external stimulus. By implication, an auditory (p. 790) verbal hallucination is an experience of hearing someone speak, which occurs in the absence of a speaker. Such definitions are commonplace in the literature. For example: Voices are defined as a sensory perception that has a compelling sense of reality, but which occurs without external stimulation of the sensory organ.

(Hayward, Berry, and Aston 2011: 1314)

Auditory hallucinations (AHs) are auditory experiences that occur in the absence of a corresponding external stimulation and which resemble a veridical percep son.

(Waters et al. 2012: 683)

Auditory verbal hallucinations (AVHs) are a sensory experience that takes place in the absence of any external stimulation whilst in a fully conscious state.

(de Leeds-Smith and Backus 2013: 1)

This understanding is consistent with the (remarkably cursory) description of AVHs sup plied by DSM-5: “Auditory hallucinations are usually experienced as voices, whether fa miliar or unfamiliar, that are perceived as distinct from the individual’s own thoughts” ( American Psychiatric Association 2013: 87). The only further qualification of freed here is that cases where someone is falling asleep or waking up should be excluded. But again, it might seem that the relevant experiences are easy enough to comprehend: they are just like hearing someone speak. If that is right, then cursory definitions and de scriptions are unproblematic. It is obvious what the relevant phenomenology consists of and so the phenomenological preliminaries can be dispensed with quickly.

This article will show that matters are considerably more complicated. The kinds of exp rience routinely labeled as “AVHs” are diverse, and many of them are not at all like hear ing someone speak. Furthermore, in the context of severe psychiatric illness, AVHs are generally not circumscribed perceptual anomalies. They are embedded in much widerranging phenomenological disturbances, of a kind that are difficult to describe. It is de Eatable whether and to what extent these disturbances correspond to established jag Gnostic categories. Hence, if AVH experiences are to be adequately characterized and dif ferentiated, in-depth phenomenological research is needed, of a kind that is able to ac knowledge, describe, and distinguish profound disturbances in the overall structure or form of experience. Current phenomenological psychopathology acknowledges that AVHs Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context are often unlike mundane perceptual experience and that they arise within the context of more encompassing experiential changes. Nevertheless, it offers what is at best an in complete account, one that is questionable in several respects.

Interpreting Voices Talk of “hearing a voice” can mean different things in different circumstances, as elem plified by utterances such as “okay, I hear what you’re saying,” “I hear you loud and clear,” and “I hear you,” which can convey understanding, endorsement, or both, rather than merely registering the receipt of a verbal communication. Potentially different con notations should also be kept in mind when interpreting first-person reports of “voicehearing” in psychiatric illness. The need for interpretive caution is recognized by Harbin (1967: 363), who takes it as given that the relevant experiences are “imaginings” of one kind or another, but does not assume that (p. 791) they resemble veridical perceptual ex periences. It is the clinician, and perhaps not the patient, who construes them as such: What are the antecedent and concurrent conditions that lead a person publicly to report his imaginings in such a way as to lead a psychologist, psychiatrist, or oth er professional to designate the described imagining as an hallucination?

1 (Harbin 1967: 363)

A clinician’s interpretation may be influenced by factors that have no bearing on the na Cure of the experience. For instance, whether a person says “I hear a voice” or “it is as if I hear a voice” is determined, in part, by age, linguistic ability, and whether or not she is a native language speaker. Drawing on J. L. Austin, Harbin adds that talk of things seeming “real” also poses considerable interpretive challenges. Hence, even where some one explicitly refers to “hearing” one or more “voices,” it should not simply be assumed that she has an auditory experience of speech when nobody is present.

What is at least clear from first-person reports is that the various experiences labeled as AVHs are diverse. As Jasper remarks in General Psychopathology: [W]e often find “voices” as well, the “invisible” people who shout all kinds of things at the patient, ask him questions and abuse him or order him about. As to content, this may consist of single words or whole sentences; there may be a sin gle voice or a whole jumble of voices; it may be an orderly conversation between the voices themselves or between them and the patient. They may be women’s, children’s or men’s voices, the voices of acquaintances or unknown people, or quite undefinable human voices. Curses may be uttered, actions of the patient may be commented on or there may be meaningless words, empty repetitions.

Sometimes the patient hears his own thoughts spoken aloud.

(Jasper 1963: 73).

Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context More recent studies have identified several dimensions of variation, including whether the voice addresses the subject in the second person or refers to her in the third person, whether its experienced origin is internal or external to the subject, the number of voices heard, the degree to which voices are personified, the thematic content of utterances, how elaborate the content is, whether or not there are hallucinations in other modalities, degree of control over voices, and degree of distress caused. Nevertheless, it remains unclear which differences are superficial and which more pro found. In fact, it is not even clear which criteria should be employed to distinguish de Crees of profundity or to classify AVHs into subtypes for one or another purpose. One thing that does become apparent, however, is that many so-called “AVHs,” most likely the majority, are quite unlike hearing someone speak. Nayani and David report that 49% of their subjects heard voices “through their ears as external stimuli,” while 38% ex perienced them as occurring in “in internal space,” and 12% experienced both, while Leu dar et al. (1997: 888–889) state that 71% of their subjects heard only internal voices, 18% heard voices “through their ears,” and 11% heard both. Internal voices are often de Ascribed as lacking some or all auditory characteristics. This is perhaps best exemplified by the reports of congenitally deaf “voice-hearers,” who often express bemusement when (p. 792) asked whether their voices have one or another auditory property. But many others similarly report voices that originate in an internal location, often “in the head,” and that lack some or all auditory qualities. These experiences may also be de Ascribed in terms of receiving a communication from elsewhere, reading in the absence of a text, having a perception-like experience of something that remains somehow thoughtlike, or as like telepathy. That they differ substantially from other AVHs, which are expert Inced as audition-like and as originating in an external location, is clear from the test monies of those who experience both types and contrast them, sometimes explicitly stat ing that they use the term “voice” to refer to two different kinds of experience.

Phenomenologically inspired approaches to AVHs recognize that the relevant experience is often quite unlike hearing someone speak. For instance, Henriksen, Raballo, and Par nas (2015: 167) take it to be more a “sort of direct inner intuition” than a “sensory expert Once.” In support of that interpretation, they quote first-person accounts such as the fol lowing: “... often, I cannot tell if I have a thought, if it’s the voice, or if it’s a feeling I have.”

“... the voice seems partly real, but at the same time distorted. It can also appear as a face or a text. I cannot really describe the sound.”

(quoted by Henriksen, Raballo, and Paras 2015: 167)

Such experiences are not usually mistaken for veridical auditory communications, and are instead distinguished from them with ease (although this is not to deny that confusion can occur). As noted by J. H. van den Berg (1982: 105), psychiatric patients often know “full well the difference in nature between their hallucinations and their perceptions.” They Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context may even give their voices a “special name,” to indicate that they have a “recognizable character of their own which distinguishes them from perception and also from imagine son.” So a person might refer to hearing voices and insist that she really does hear voices, while at the same time speaking and acting in a way that implies recognition of their dis tinctness from mundane auditory perceptions. This is consistent with the wider phenom non of double-bookkeeping, where a person’s words and actions indicate an equivocal at titude toward delusions and perceptions; they are perceptionand belief-like in certain re Aspects but at the same time set apart from mundane perceptions and beliefs. Phenomenological approaches have tended to focus on AVH experiences of this kind, and have sought to develop accounts of more enveloping phenomenological disturb Dances that they depend upon.

AVHs as Symptoms of Self-Disorder A consistent theme in phenomenological psychopathology is that AVHs are largely attrib table to global changes in the form of experience—not what is experienced but how. So they are not isolated “hallucinations,” which occur against a backdrop of otherwise un problematic experience. The emphasis of discussion has been on AVHs in schizophrenia. The earliest descriptions of dementia praecox/schizophrenia, by Emil Kraepelin and Eu gen Bleuler, identify profound disturbances in the experience of self, involving pervasive changes in perception, emotion, thought, and agency. Kraepelin (1919: 3) writes that there is a “peculiar destruction of the internal connections of the psychic personality,” while Bleuler (1950: 9) refers to a “splitting of the psychic functions,” where “the person laity loses its unity.” The theme of (p. 793) self-disturbance or self-disorder in schizophre nia has been further developed by subsequent phenomenological psychopathology. Sever 2 al recent discussions have adopted the term “minimal self.” As described in detail by Za have, minimal self is not an object of reflective or pre-reflective experience; it is not an isolable kale or feeling of any kind; it is not a transcendental condition for the poss Ability of experience that lies behind the relevant experiences; and it is not a mere abstract son from experience. Rather, it is an indispensable structural condition for experience, which is integral to all experiences. As such, it is an inextricable aspect of experience, as opposed to an isolable component. Zahavi (2014: 22) thus refers to it as a sense of “mine Bess” that is inseparable from the “distinct manner, or how, of experiencing.”

The concept of minimal self has been applied, in slightly different ways, to the phenom nology of schizophrenia by Thomas Fuchs, Josef Paras, Louis Sass, and others. It is pro posed that AVHs presuppose wider-ranging phenomenological disturbances, which arise before the onset of specific symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions. These disturb Dances centrally implicate the most basic experience of selfhood, the minimal self. For ex ample, Sass (2014: 5–6) states that schizophrenia involves a “disturbance of minimalor core-self experience” or “ipseity,” the “sense of existing as a vital and self-identical sub Sect of experience or agent of action.” Paras et al. (2005: 244) refer to the erosion of a “basic self-awareness (ipseity),” something that more usually operates as a “ medium or a mode in which specific intentional experiences, such as perception, thinking, or imagine Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context son, articulate themselves”. Fuchs (2013: 248) likewise emphasizes the disruption of a “first-person perspective” that “inhabits all modes of intentionality and imbues them with a sense of Fineness.”

Disturbances of minimal self envelop all aspects of the structure of experience—the sense of being immersed in a world, how one experiences and relates to other people in goner al, the sense of time, bodily experience, and experiences of agency, perception, thought, and emotion. Although the emphasis of discussion varies somewhat, it is consistently maintained that a profound alteration in the overall structure or form of experience takes hold in the prodromal stages of schizophrenia, and precedes more specific symptoms. It is further claimed that seemingly localized symptoms, include ing AVHs, are only intelligible in the context of a subtle and hard-to-describe alteration in the global structure of experience. Hence they are not “atomistic, self-sufficient, thinglike symptoms.” Rather, they are “meaningfully interrelated facets of a more comprehend chive and characteristic gestalt change in the patient’s experience (field of consciousness) and existence” ( Larøi, de Naan, Jones, and Raballo 2010: 235).

More specific, and largely complementary, accounts have also been offered of how changes in the sense of self (and, by implication, in the overall structure of experience) give rise to AVHs. The common theme is that one becomes estranged from one’s own thought processes, which are experienced as increasingly alien, as somehow object-like. Sass offers an influential account, which emphasizes what he calls “hyperreflexivity”: a largely involuntary attentiveness to aspects of expert Once that are more usually unproblematic and inconspicuous. In his words, it is “a conj son in which phenomena that would normally be inhabited, and in this sense experienced as part of the self, come instead to be objects of focal or objectifying awareness” ( Sass 2003: 153). AVHs and other kinds of anomalous experience are thus attributable, at least in part, to a kind of (p. 794) alienating self-awareness (e.g. Sass 1992: 226–235). Thoughts are no longer integral to a medium through which one engages with the world and in stead appear curiously conspicuous and alien. Along with this, there is a more general sense of practical disengagement from the world as a whole and from other people, as well as a pervasive detachment from one’s thoughts, perceptions, and activities.

Others similarly suggest that AVHs involve thought becoming somehow object-like. Hen risen, Raballo, and Paras (2015: 172) refer to the “morbid objectification of inner speech” as an “essential” precursor to the formation of AVHs, whereby a medium of awareness, through which one experiences and engages with one’s surroundings, grad ally becomes an object of awareness. There is, they say, a kind of “dissociation” between the “sense of self” or “ipseity” and the “flow of consciousness.” This is presupposed by the intelligibility of AVHs; such experiences involve a quasi-perceptual sense of alienation from one’s own thoughts, of a kind that could not arise against the backdrop of a more 3 mundane experience of the self and its surroundings.

Proponents of this view tend to maintain that the phenomenological “gestalt” within which AVHs crystallize is specific to schizophrenia: self-disturbance in schizophrenia is Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context uniquely pronounced, and also qualitatively distinctive from other kinds of self-disorder. It has been further proposed that self-disorder is detectable before the onset of clinically significant levels of disturbance (Cermolacce, Naudin, and Paras 2007; Raballo and Par nas 2011: 1018). This raises the possibility of employing phenomenologically inspired methods for the purposes of early detection and thus early intervention. To this end, Par nas and colleagues have developed the Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience (EASE), a detailed checklist for a semi-structured, phenomenological interview, the preen cipal aim of which is to reliably detect disorders of minimal self-awareness that are spe civic to the schizophrenia spectrum. So, to summarize, the overall pic Cure is that AVHs, or at least certain kinds of AVH, are preceded by and depend upon a distinctive disturbance of the overall structure of experience, of a kind that is specific to schizophrenia. This disturbance alienates the subject from her own thoughts (or, more specifically, inner speech), to such an extent that she eventually comes to experience some of them in a quasi-perceptual, object-like way.

An Incomplete Story It is plausible to insist that many AVHs are not like hearing a voice, and also that such ex periences tend to arise against a backdrop of wider-ranging phenomenological disturb Dances. Even so, the explanatory power of the self-disorder account is currently rather limited. Furthermore, certain aspects of the account are unclear, and others question able. (p. 795) For one thing, why AVHs are experienced only episodically remains unex pained. If there is an all-enveloping phenomenological change that renders thought somehow perception-like, then surely all thoughts, or at least all thoughts of a certain type (for instance, those that take the form of inner speech) would be experienced in this way. One might respond that the relevant change is temporally inconsistent, and there fore disrupts some thoughts to a greater extent than others. While this might accommo date the sporadic nature of the experiences, it leaves their content-specificity unaccount ed for. AVHs in severe psychiatric illness tend to have consistent and often quite specific thematic contents. For instance, voices are often abusive; over 50% of those voice-hear ers with psychiatric illness diagnoses report critical, hostile, abusive voices. Until the self-disorder approach can show why global changes in the structure of experience lead to sporadic, content-specific experiences, it remains importantly incomplete.

In addition, the claim that self-disturbance culminates in an object-like experience of thought is not wholly clear, and may involve a degree of equivocation over the term “ob Sect.” On one reading, “object” refers to an object of experience. In other words, it per Cains to whatever it is that we experience, as distinct from any qualities attached to the act of experiencing. So one could say that, while our thoughts ordinarily have objects, they are not themselves objects. Nevertheless, even if it is accepted that thoughts are not ordinary objects of experience, it seems plausible to maintain that we can be reflectively (and perhaps unreflectively) aware of our own thoughts in this way without feeling alien ted from them. And the claim that thought becomes object-like is intended to convey Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context something more specific than this. Thoughts become somehow akin to a type of object of perception: an inanimate entity that is external to the self. But in what respect? Some times, it seems as though the answer is that they acquire sensory properties that are ordi Warily attributed to certain entities and occurrences in the external environment but not to thoughts. Consistent with this, Paras et al. (2005: 241) refer to a “perceptualization of inner speech or thought,” stating that inner speech takes on “ acoustic and in more severe states auditory qualities.” There are also descriptions of inner speech becoming “more pronounced” before the onset of voices, with “subtle pre-psychotic distortions of the stream of consciousness—such as abnormal sonorization of inner dialogue and/or percep tualization of thought” ( Raballo and Larøi 2011: 163). With this, thought ceases to be part of the medium through which we experience and engage with our surroundings and in stead becomes something separate from ourselves, something we confront. However, the appeal to sensory properties is in tension with the admission that AVHs are quite unlike auditory perceptual experiences. Furthermore, much the same contrast between alienate ed and non-alienated experiential contents arguably applies to perception as well. For ex ample, in Autobiography of a Schizophrenic Girl, Renee describes her experiences of pre Piously familiar objects as follows: Objects are stage trappings, placed here and there, geometric cubes without meaning.... When, for example, I looked at a chair or a jug, I thought not of their use or function—a jug not as something to hold water and milk, a chair not as something to sit in—but as having lost their names, their functions and meanings; they became “things” and began to take on life, to exist.

(Sechehaye 1970: 44, 55–56)

In the case of an AVH, the claim is not that inner speech is experienced as akin to a mun Bane auditory perception. A more appropriate comparison would be with the kind of alienated (p. 796) perceptual experience described by Renee. However, that being the case, it is inaccurate to say that thought becomes perception-like, given that thought is experienced as alien in a way that can equally be contrasted with mundane, non-alienated perceptual experiences of “objects.” The relevant sense of alienation should therefore be distinguished from the adoption of perceptual characteristics. It does not require such characteristics and, even if they are present, they do not account for it. Talk of “objectify cation” thus refers to a sense of alienation that requires further clarification, something that differs from both ordinary thought and ordinary perception.

But perhaps the most substantial problem with the minimal self account of AVHs is the widespread insistence that self-disorder, of the relevant kind, is schizophrenia-specific. That position is explicit in the writings of Paras and some of his collaborators, although 4 others are less committal. Current applications of the label “schizophrenia” most likely accommodate a far wider range of experiences. So the self-disorder proposal is presume ably intended to be revisionary, at least to some extent. By identifying schizophrenia with a certain type of self-disorder, the intention is to apply the diagnosis in a more principled, discerning, and restrictive way. Let us accept, for the sake of argument, that the self-dis Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context order account of schizophrenia is right. The problem we then face is that schizophreniaspecific self-disorder does not seem to be necessary for AVHs, including those AVHs that involve perception-like experiences of alienated thought content. It is widely acknowl edged that AVHs can occur in non-clinical, healthy subjects as well, although their fre quench in the non-clinical population is debated (e.g. Altman and Larøi 2008: chapter 3; Watkins 2008; McCarthy-Jones 2012: chapter 7). Some further maintain that the AVH ex periences of healthy and clinical subjects are much the same. For instance, Somme and Escher suggest that what distinguishes the two populations is not their expert Fences per se but how they react to those experiences. In clinical subjects, voices and the like are a source of considerable distress, nurturing a pervasive feeling of disempower Bent and helplessness.

One response on behalf of the self-disorder view is to reject the claim that the expert Fences are relevantly similar. It might initially seem that they are, but only because of a failure to explore the comparative phenomenology in sufficient depth. Stanghellini et al. (2012 ) note that the relevant studies are seldom sufficiently receptive to potential phe nomenological differences, and argue that detailed first-person descriptions in fact point to quite different experiences. Henriksen, Raballo, and Paras (2015 ) also emphasize var Nous differences between AVHs in schizophrenia and in healthy subjects. Hence distin gushing between AVHs in healthy subjects and in those with schizophrenia diagnoses may not be so much of a problem. Nevertheless, the same cannot be said of AVHs in schizophrenia and in other types of psychiatric illness. AVHs are associated with several other conditions, including post-traumatic stress disorder, psychotic depression, bipolar disorder, and borderline personality disorder. For example, Upthegrove et al. quote frequencies of 70% in schizophrenia, 23% in bipolar disorder, and 46% in border line personality disorder. First-person accounts of abusive, insulting, or threatening void es in these populations have much in common. Now, it could be that certain experiences are more common in schizophrenia than elsewhere, such as “running commentary or ar Cuing voices” ( Henriksen, Raballo, and Paras 2015: 178). But (p. 797) even Somme and Escher (2006: 167) are happy to concede that voices commenting in the third person are more common in those with schizophrenia diagnoses. What remains the case is that all sorts of other AVH experiences do not seem to be schizophrenia-specific, and are com mon to several diagnostic categories. Claims for the schizophrenia-specificity of a certain type of AVH tend to contrast AVHs in schizophrenia with AVHs in non-clinical populations. However, not enough work has been done to support the claim that they are equally distinguishable from AVHs in other clinical pop Cations. And, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, the default assumption should be that these experiences have much in common.

One response on behalf of the self-disorder view is to reject the claim that the expert Fences are relevantly similar. It might initially seem that they are, but only because of a failure to explore the comparative phenomenology in sufficient depth. Stanghellini et al. (2012 ) note that the relevant studies are seldom sufficiently receptive to potential phe nomenological differences, and argue that detailed first-person descriptions in fact point to quite different experiences. Henriksen, Raballo, and Paras (2015 ) also emphasize var Nous differences between AVHs in schizophrenia and in healthy subjects. Hence distin gushing between AVHs in healthy subjects and in those with schizophrenia diagnoses may not be so much of a problem. Nevertheless, the same cannot be said of AVHs in schizophrenia and in other types of psychiatric illness. AVHs are associated with several other conditions, including post-traumatic stress disorder, psychotic depression, bipolar disorder, and borderline personality disorder. For example, Upthegrove et al. quote frequencies of 70% in schizophrenia, 23% in bipolar disorder, and 46% in border line personality disorder. First-person accounts of abusive, insulting, or threatening void es in these populations have much in common. Now, it could be that certain experiences are more common in schizophrenia than elsewhere, such as “running commentary or ar Cuing voices” ( Henriksen, Raballo, and Paras 2015: 178). But (p. 797) even Somme and Escher (2006: 167) are happy to concede that voices commenting in the third person are more common in those with schizophrenia diagnoses. What remains the case is that all sorts of other AVH experiences do not seem to be schizophrenia-specific, and are com mon to several diagnostic categories. Claims for the schizophrenia-specificity of a certain type of AVH tend to contrast AVHs in schizophrenia with AVHs in non-clinical populations. However, not enough work has been done to support the claim that they are equally distinguishable from AVHs in other clinical pop Cations. And, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, the default assumption should be that these experiences have much in common.

A related problem for the self-disorder account is that not all AVHs in severe psychiatric illness are quite so different from veridical auditory experiences. While some involve en countering thought or inner speech in a perception-like way (the nature of which needs to be spelled out more clearly), others are more like hearing someone speak. Wu thus proposes that many AVHs are exactly as the term would suggest: non-veridical auditory perceptual experiences of voices. In a clinical context, Dodgson and Gordon make Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context a more specific case for what they call “hypervigilance hallucinations,” which are to be distinguished from inner speech AVHs. The former arise due to pervasive anxious antis Cation, of a kind that is commonplace in psychiatric illness and diagnostically non-specif ic. Because the subject is always on the alert, anticipating self-directed communications with negative thematic contents, there is an increased disposition toward false positives, where ambiguous sensory information is interpreted (and also experienced ) in terms of voices. Even without recourse to a principled taxonomy of AVH-subtypes, it is clear that an anomalous experience of inner speech is very different from an over-interpretation of perceptual stimuli, and it is equally clear that the two experiences come about in differ 5 ent ways. Both kinds of experience are associated with schizophrenia diagnoses. And, if they are both to be explained in terms of self-disorder, the relevant explanation needs to distinguish the ways in which a common, underlying self-disorder gives rise to two very different types of experience.

Given these various concerns, it is clear that the self-disorder account of AVHs requires further refinement. As things stand, phenomenological approaches are not even close to showing that the majority of AVHs occurring in schizophrenia are diagnostically specific. Of course, it could be that schizophrenic self-disorder is one of many different phenom nological contexts in which these experiences can arise. But, if that is so, we would have to concede that, although self-disorder might be sufficient to bring about AVHs, it is not necessary for them. And this would involve abandoning strong claims about AVHs only be ing intelligible in the context of a distinctive phenomenological “gestalt,” thus substantial ly weakening the position. Worse still, it would open up the possibility that self-disorder is not even sufficient for AVHs. If one accepts that it is not necessary, then one cannot sim ply assume that it has a role to play when it is present. Perhaps it is just an accompany Bent, an associated symptom. Or, to really complicate matters, perhaps schizophreniaspecific self-disorder is necessary and sufficient for some types of AVHs, necessary but not sufficient for others, sufficient but not necessary for others, and neither necessary nor sufficient for others. All four possibilities remain open. An alternative option would be to concede that the degree and (p. 798) type of self-disorder required for AVHs of one or another type is not, after all, schizophrenia-specific. Whatever the case, the claim that AVHs are only intelligible in relation to a certain kind of profound phenomenological dis turbance needs more work. The types of AVH in question need to be specified more clear ly, as does the kind of “objectification” they involve. And the alleged specificity to schizo phrenia needs to be reconciled with the much wider range of most, if not all, types of AVH experience.

Trauma and Psychosis To conclude, I want to briefly contrast the self-disorder view with another, currently pop lar, way of thinking about AVHs. This alternative maintains that AVHs are not symptoms of schizophrenia. They are instead attributable to traumatic experiences and to an assoc ted sense of alienation from other people, neither of which are consistently associated with one or another psychiatric diagnosis. Two prominent advocates of the view are Mar Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context ius Somme and Sandra Escher, who insist that “voices” originate in unresolved trauma and are essentially relational in nature. They propose that we reconceptualize “psy chosis” as an “emotional crisis,” of a kind that is essentially interpersonal in nature and also embedded in a wider sociocultural context. “Voices,” they maintain, should not be re Carded as illness symptoms that are to be eliminated through treatment. Rather, we should seek to make sense of them, to grasp their emotional meanings and their relation ships to life-history. So the aim is not so much to get rid of them as to help the person come to terms with them and, in so doing, to reduce the distress they cause.

Setting aside the specifics of Somme and Escher’s approach, the view that AVHs are closely associated with trauma is a plausible one. There is a substantial literature point ing to strong correlations between childhood abuse, as well as other traumatic events at various life stages, and the later onset of psychosis. There are also correlations between types of abuse and specific symptoms. For instance, childhood sexual abuse is particular ly strongly associated with AVHs. Some symptoms are most reliably associated with com binations of childhood and adulthood trauma, and there are also dose-response relation ships. In the majority of cases, there is every reason to believe that first-person reports are accurate. An emphasis on the relational nature of AVH experiences and on their interpersonal causes is in tension with claims made by Par nas and colleagues. While acknowledging that self-disorder inevitably implies profound changes in the interpersonal sphere, they insist that self-disorder comes first, both phe nomenologically and causally. Instead of emphasizing the interpersonal and social, they seek to identify genetic causes. Raballo, Sæbye, and Paras (2009: 348) go so far as to state that the “primary relevance” of work on self-disorder in schizophrenia is to “etiology 6 cal research into the genetic architecture of schizophrenia.” Setting aside the specifics of Somme and Escher’s approach, the view that AVHs are closely associated with trauma is a plausible one. There is a substantial literature point ing to strong correlations between childhood abuse, as well as other traumatic events at various life stages, and the later onset of psychosis. There are also correlations between types of abuse and specific symptoms. For instance, childhood sexual abuse is particular ly strongly associated with AVHs. Some symptoms are most reliably associated with com binations of childhood and adulthood trauma, and there are also dose-response relation ships. In the majority of cases, there is every reason to believe that first-person reports are accurate. An emphasis on the relational nature of AVH experiences and on their interpersonal causes is in tension with claims made by Par nas and colleagues. While acknowledging that self-disorder inevitably implies profound changes in the interpersonal sphere, they insist that self-disorder comes first, both phe nomenologically and causally. Instead of emphasizing the interpersonal and social, they seek to identify genetic causes. Raballo, Sæbye, and Paras (2009: 348) go so far as to state that the “primary relevance” of work on self-disorder in schizophrenia is to “etiology 6 cal research into the genetic architecture of schizophrenia.”

(p. 799) The association with interpersonal trauma does at least serve to account for the content-specificity of AVHs, as well as the frequent negativity of content. It also accom modates varying degrees of personification. A voice, and the personality that comes to be associated with it, could resemble—to varying degrees and in different ways—a particular person, such as an abuser or perhaps a protector. That said, there is a lack of clarity here too. It is sometimes unclear whether the position is that AVHs are often incorrectly taken to be symptoms of schizophrenia or, alternatively, that the schizophrenia construct should be dismissed altogether. For instance, Longden, Madill, and Waterman maintain that voices are attributable to dissociation rather than psychosis but at the same time re Sect the distinction between them (rejecting, by implication, a distinction between schizo phrenia and Effective disorders). But you can’t have it both ways. It is also unclear which types of AVH are associated with trauma and which are not, or whether the relational contexts in which post-traumatic AVHs arise also amount to pervasive alterations in the overall form of experience, along the lines of what phenomenological psychopathology has sought to describe.

Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context Regardless of the many gray areas, it at least appears that these two positions are op posed to each other. One of them attributes AVHs to self-disorders, which are responsible for disturbances of interpersonal relatedness, have a largely genetic origin, and are spe civic to schizophrenia. The other takes AVHs to be essentially interpersonal, relational phenomena, does not recognize the existence of pre-intersubjective self-disorder, insists that AVHs have an interpersonal origin (in most cases), and rejects the association with schizophrenia. The contrast is an intriguing one, given that both positions are developed in detail, supported by substantial bodies of evidence, and in many respects plausible. As is evident from a brief scan of the sources they tend to cite, the two have, to date, pro Deeded in near-complete isolation from each other. Nevertheless, there is at least one au Thor in the phenomenological tradition who comes close to combining them. Wolfgang Blankenburg (1969/2001, 1971/2012) describes altered experience of self, body, world, and other people, of the kind associated with schizophrenia, in terms of a pervasive loss of habitual, bodily, commonsense, or a loss of natural self-evidence (Verlust der natür lichen Selbstverständlichkeit ). With this, a previously taken-for-granted, unthinking confi Fence is gone and everything seems strangely unfamiliar. Thus, as Sass similarly empha sizes, what once operated as an unthinking background to thought, experience, and active ity is now oddly conspicuous. Blankenburg adds that this “commonsense” is inextricable from how a person relates to others. It is, he says, “primarily related to an intersubjective world ( mitweltbezogen ).” To be more specific, it consists of a confidence that is inextrica ble from the ability to sustain a kind of habitual, pre-reflective “trust” other people ( Ver trauenkönnen ). Furthermore, adverse events that occur during interpersonal develop Bent can either fail to nurture or derail the “basic trust” upon which a wider common sense depends (1969/2001: 307, 310).

What we have here is an account that combines an emphasis on profound and wide-rang ing phenomenological changes (involving a sense of alienation from the world, one’s ac tivities, one’s body, and even one’s own thoughts) with an acknowledgment of their ibex tricability from the interpersonal sphere and from patterns of interpersonal development.

What we have here is an account that combines an emphasis on profound and wide-rang ing phenomenological changes (involving a sense of alienation from the world, one’s ac tivities, one’s body, and even one’s own thoughts) with an acknowledgment of their ibex tricability from the interpersonal sphere and from patterns of interpersonal development.

7 This points to various potential ways of bringing the two together. Perhaps Blankenburg’s loss of commonsense is to be identified with self-disorder, in which case the “minimal self” (p. 800) would have to be conceived of as a “relational self” too, some thing that depends for its integrity on a primitive sense of trust in others. Alternatively, it could be that loss of commonsense is sometimes or always preceded by a more fund 8 mental disturbance of minimal self. And, if a more primitive form of self-disturbance is sufficient for loss of commonsense but not necessary for it, we are then faced with the question of whether disruption of commonsense (of whatever degree) can fuel the Bevel opment of one or another kind of AVH, even in the absence of underlying self-disorder. Last but not least, there is the issue of whether any types of AVHs, or any of the widerranging experiential disturbances that they depend upon, reliably track the diagnostic category “schizophrenia,” rather than severe psychiatric illness more generally. Perhaps they do but, as things stand, the jury is still out.

Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context # Acknowledgments Thanks to Matthew Brooke and Louis Sass for commenting on an earlier version of this article. Thanks also to Sam Wilkinson for many helpful conversations concerning this top ic. PAGE_BREAK 1 ( ) Over time, it may be that the patient adopts some of the language that health-care pro fessionals employ to describe her condition. Hence a clear distinction can no longer be drawn between her own narrative and one that labels her experiences as “hallucina sons.” This makes interpretation even more challenging.

2 ( ) For references to complementary themes in earlier phenomenological writings see e.g. Sass and Fuchs.

3 ( ) On one interpretation, AVHs of this type are indistinguishable from experiences of thought insertion (TI). If TI is taken to involve an experience of alienation from thought content, rather than from the process of thinking, then it could equally be described as a perception-like experience of thought content, which is exactly how Henriksen et al. (2015 ) conceive of AVHs. For a more detailed defense of the view that TI is to be identi Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Their Phenomenological Context Died with (a certain kind of) AVH, see Radcliffe and Wilkinson; Radcliffe. For an attempt to retain the AVH/TI distinction in such cases, see Humpston and Brooke.

4 ( ) For instance, Sass (2014: 5) is more generally cautious about the schizophrenia con strict. He suggests that, although flawed, it does at least appear seem to suggest “some subtle but underlying factor at the core of a psychiatric condition that is perhaps best conceived of as a syndrome (and probably represents a final common pathway with di verse etiological origins).”

5 ( ) The possibility remains that the difference between other kinds of external, auditionlike AVH and internal, thought-like experiences is more a matter of degrees, that there is a spectrum of experiences.

6 ( ) See also Raballo and Paras (2011 ). However, not all advocates of a self-disorder ap roach place so much emphasis on genetic causes. Borda and Sass and Sass and Borda (2015 ) acknowledge potential roles for various different biological and non-biology cal causes at different life-stages. They also emphasize the heterogeneity of schizophre nia and propose a broad distinction between two kinds of scenario. In one of these, onset is early, negative symptoms predominate, and self-disorder is a prominent cause. In the other, onset is acute, positive symptoms are more salient, and “secondary factors” may have a greater role to play than “primary” self-disorder.

7 ( ) For an attempt to develop such an approach in detail, see Radcliffe.

8 ( ) Fuchs acknowledges and discusses in detail the kind of phenomenological change Blankenburg describes. He also recognizes its inextricability from interpersonal dynamics. Nevertheless, he continues to maintain that alteration of a “pre-reflective, em bodied self” has priority and necessitates disruption of social relations.

Matthew Radcliffe Matthew Radcliffe Department of Philosophy, University of Vienna, Austria Effective Temperaments Effective Temperaments Andrea Raballo and Lorenzo Pelizza The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Apr 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter discusses the phenomenology of Effective temperaments as well as their sub jective nuances and potential pathogenetic trajectories. It first considers the notion that different kinds of temperament are constitutionally based Effective-behavioral dispose sons, tracing it back to Hippocratic medicine with the theory of the four humors. It then explains how the modern concept of Effective temperaments has been operationalized in a clinical descriptive framework. In particular, it explores the works of Emil Kraepelin, Ernst Kretschmer, and Hubert's Tellenbach on Effective psychoses, human emotions, and Types Melancholics (TM), respectively. The chapter also examines the pathogenic role of TM as a specific personality structure, how despair intervenes in the transition from the pre-melancholic to the melancholic phase, and the status of temperaments within the con text of Effective phenomenology.

Keywords: Effective temperaments, Emil Kraepelin, Ernst Kretschmer, Hubert's Tellenbach, Effective psychoses, emotions, personality, Types Melancholics, despair, Effective phenomenology # Temperaments: The Hippocratic Archaeology of # a Concept THE concepts of temperament and character are probably among the most ancient, tent Dive conceptualization of the constituents of mental states. For example, the notion that different kinds of temperament are constitutionally based Effective-behavioral dispose sons can be traced back to Hippocratic medicine with the theory of the four humors. Such theory—based on analogic coherence—attempted to bridge the con stituents of the macro-cosmos (i.e. the four basic elements of the Universe) with the biopsychological constitution of the individual (i.e. fluids, secreting organs, and tempera mental features) (see Table 77.1).

Effective Temperaments According to Hippocratic medicine the harmonic balance (“eucrasia”) among the four hu Tors was a prerequisite for somatic and physical health. The pathophysiology of disease states was therefore explained as a consequence of the “ dyscrasia ” (i.e. a dis-proportion of the humors) and the relative proportions of bodily humors was expected to influence and predict individual character types.

Since then, the notion of temperament has been broadly used to denote the temporally stable biological core of personality (i.e. an individual’s activity level, as reflected in his biorhythms, moods, and related cognition as well as their variability) as opposed to the set of more malleable, acquired dispositions and interpersonal styles, that constitute the characterological determinants of personality. In this sense, despite a complex conceptual history, temperament has remained a sort of “bridge between the psychology and biology of Effective disorders” and a canonic notion addressed by several leading authors since the last century. (p. 804) According to Hippocratic medicine the harmonic balance (“eucrasia”) among the four hu Tors was a prerequisite for somatic and physical health. The pathophysiology of disease states was therefore explained as a consequence of the “ dyscrasia ” (i.e. a dis-proportion of the humors) and the relative proportions of bodily humors was expected to influence and predict individual character types.

Since then, the notion of temperament has been broadly used to denote the temporally stable biological core of personality (i.e. an individual’s activity level, as reflected in his biorhythms, moods, and related cognition as well as their variability) as opposed to the set of more malleable, acquired dispositions and interpersonal styles, that constitute the characterological determinants of personality. In this sense, despite a complex conceptual history, temperament has remained a sort of “bridge between the psychology and biology of Effective disorders” and a canonic notion addressed by several leading authors since the last century. (p. 804)

Effective Temperaments Table 77. Synopsis of the Hippocratic humors, with related physical elements, organs, and temperamental features Bodily Humor Cosmologic Ele Reference Organ Temperament Character Attrib Bent Utes Blood Air Heart Sanguine Courageous, hope ful, playful, carefree Yellow bile Fire Liver Choleric Ambitious, leaderlike, restless, easily angered Black bile Earth Spleen Melancholic Despondent, quiet, analytical, serious Phlegm Water Brain Phlegmatic Calm, thoughtful, patient, peaceful Reproduced from Konstantinos Kalachanis and Ioannis Michailidis, “The Hippocratic View on Humors and Human Temperament,” European Journal of Social Behavior 2: 1–5, Table 1, doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.237103 © 2015 Kon stantinos Kalachanis and Ioannis Michailidis. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 In ternational License. It is attributed to the authors Konstantinos Kalachanis and Ioannis Michailidis.

Effective Temperaments # Kraepelin: Temperaments as Fundamental # States Almost a century ago, while consolidating the foundations of its nosography, Kraepelin separated temperamental variants from actual, clinically overt disease states. In particular, at the less severe margins of “ manic-depressive insanity,” he identified four mild basic Effective dispositions, termed depressive, manic, irritable, and cyclothymic. Such dispositions, which could frequently be found in the blood relatives of manic–de pressie patients, were conceived as subclinical forms and potential precursors of major Effective psychoses, which harbored their pathogenetic roots in ado lescence and developmental years. In this respect, Kraepelin coined the notion of “ fundamental states ” as follows:... the real, the deeper cause of the malady [manic-depressive insanity] is to be sought in a permanent morbid state which must also continue to exist in the inter veils between the attacks....The permanent changes... essentially consist of pe culiarities in the emotional life... [which] are observed with special frequency as simple personal peculiarities in the family of manic-depressive patients..... We are, therefore, led to the conclusion that there are certain temperaments which may be regarded as rudiments of manic-depressive insanity. (1921: 117–118)

Those were “the depressive temperament (constitutional moodiness), the manic temperament (constitutional excitement), and the irritable temperament” plus the cyclothymic temperament, “in which moodiness and excitement frequently and abruptly alternate with each other.” (1921: 118)

(p. 805) These fundamental states (see appendix ) might emerge as peculiar forms of psy chic personality without further development or may became the starting point of a mor bid process with multiple manic-depressive episodes.

Kretschmer: Temperament and Endogenous # Psychoses In the same years, Kretschmer exploring the transition between normal variants, specific temperamental accentuation, and endogenous psychoses, conceptualized temperament as an “affectivity behavior” linking physical constitution and psychological features. He proposed that human emotions were to be differentiated along two dimensional axes: mood and sensitivity. The mood dimension was represented on a spectrum from joy to sadness, usually combined in each individual in “ diathetic proper son ”; whereas the sensitivity dimension ranged from sensitive to dull, typically balanced in the “psychesthetic proportion ” of the person. Based on the relative contribution of one or another axes (i.e. mood and sensitivity), Kretschmer distinguished two basic types of Effective Temperaments personality: “ cyclothymic ” and “ schizothymic.” Within the mood dimension, the continua um ranged from cyclothymia (variant of norm) to cycloid personality disorder (“ cycloid temperament ”) to manic-depressive illness, while along the sensitivity dimension, the continuum included schizothymia (variant of norm), schizoid personality disorder (“ schizoid temperament ”), and schizophrenia. According to such an overarching view Kretschmer explicitly claimed: We shall no longer look on certain types of personality as psychopathic abortive forms of certain psychoses, but vice versa, certain psychoses will figure as carica Cures of certain normal types of personality. The psychoses are thus only rare ex aggerated editions of large wide-spread groups of healthy constitutions. (1925: 207)

Crucially, in determining personality features, Kretschmer included emotional and psy chomotor patterns, as well as psychic tempo (see Table 77.2).

Thus, if the prevalent personality trait of cyclothymia is the syntonic “capacity for living, feeling and suffering with his surroundings,” the corresponding psychomotility is smooth and natural, whereas the psychic tempo oscillates from fast and mobile to slow. In schizothymia, the psychic tempo is charac terized by abruptness and discontinuity, corresponding to a lack of psychomotor harmony between the emotional stimulus and the reaction, and to a broader attrition with the nevi ronment eliciting a general, excitable oversensitivity or distancing coldness. In this respect, Kretschmer’s seminal investigations first offer an initial depiction of prototypical forms of human subjectivity that, through temperamental accentuation (i.e. schizoid and cycloid), might lead to overt psychotic states (i.e. schizophrenia and manic-depressive illness); and, second, suggest a shift of attention to the comprehensive phenomenological coherence among Effective-emotional features, psychomotricity, and psychic tempo. (p. 806)

Effective Temperaments Table 77. Mood and sensitivity scale Cyclothymia Schizothymia Mood Diathetic proportion: Psychesthetic proportion: be between elevated and tween hypersensitive and depressed. anesthetic (cold).

Psychic Wavy temperamental Jerky temperamental curve: tempo curve: between mobile between unstable and Dena and comfortable. sous.

Psy Adequate to stimulus, Often inadequate to stimu chomotil rounded, natural, lus, restrained, inhibited, ity smooth. stiff.

Data from Ernst Kretschmer. Physique and Character. London: Began Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.

Tellenbach: Types Melancholics and the An # thropological Vulnerability to Effective Visor # Hers Partly inspired by Kretschmer, Tellenbach (1914−1994), extrapolated a set of distinctive features that inform the premorbid and inter-morbid personality structure liable to en dogenous depression. Those characteristics (i.e. orderliness, conscientiousness) shape and inform a certain way of being-in-the-world that revolves around the possibility of de eloping major depression (melancholia). In Tellenbach’s view, the de velopmental pathways leading toward endogenous depression, are indeed promoted by the dialectic between a certain premorbid personality (broadly understood as an anthro pological precondition), and critical existential events. Those pre morbid characteristics conferring existential vulnerability to major Effective disorders, al ready transpire at the level of the personality structure through a stable and recognizable imprint. Such specific personality structure, termed Types Melancholics (TM), is better understood as a stable mode of relating to the world and oneself in a way that entails a potential for the development of Effective episodes. TM is defined by a set of concomitant, stable characteristics that are rooted in the ethical–ontological level of value-formation and constitute the anthropological core of the individual orientation to the social world. Because of such axiological orientation, TM pre-structures a worldview that already en tails a germ of potential decompensation.

Effective Temperaments Core phenomenological features of the TM are orderliness (i.e. an accentuated seeking for order and harmony in the field of interpersonal relationships) and conscientiousness (i.e. an elevated self-expectation above the threshold of one’s own possibilities), both fu led by the need to prevent feelings and attributions of guilt as well as to maintain the surrounding free of possible conflicts. Because of the synergetic effect of orderliness and conscientiousness, TM is constantly engaged in fulfilling many obligations in a reliable and scrupulous way, in view of preserving a controllable and pre dictable negotiation with the potential requests from the surrounding world. Moved by a (p. 807) fundamental need to avert any potential feeling of guilt, TM’s behavior is modeled on the perceived social expectation.

However, despite his efforts to preserve an ordered and controlled existential homeosta sis, TM’s radical refractoriness to being subject to the unforeseen in his/her existential field is unavoidably frustrated, inducing an important exposure to vulnerability.

Elaborating on Tellenbach, one of his scholars, Alfred Klaus identified two further fea Cures of the anthropological structure of the TM: hyper/heteronomy (i.e. an exaggerated norm adaptation and receptiveness toward external normative conventions) and intoner Once of ambiguity (i.e. a cognitive and emotional-Effective incapacity to accommodate op polite or conflicting characteristics concerning the same person or situation). Those core properties of TM have been condensed, operationalized, and field-tested in the “Criteria for Types Melancholics”. The typical way of being in the social world of the TM, is therefore based on a hypertrophy of the “role identity” (the identity sovra-structure conferred to the person by her social fun son) at the expense of the “self-identity” (the self-determination of the personality beyond simple and straightforward identification with the agent of a social role), with a reduction of the vital dialectic between these two identities and, ultimately leading to an alienation of self-identity in the impersonal formalism of the role-identity.

From Premorbid Personality to Endogenous # Depression: The Pathogenic Role of TM The TM strives not to lag behind himself, he is always following his duties and perceived obligations related to the social role, and therefore, his entire life is stretched in an effort to pay his debts before contracting them. This precarious and effortful balance gets hat treed in the pre-melancholic situation. The key feature of this situation is the emotion of despair that is the prodrome of melancholic breakdown. Crucially, Tellenbach empha sizes: What we call despair (“ Verzweiflung ”) is remaining captured in doubt... To be precise, despair is not just hopelessness and desperation, not an ultimate or an ar rival at an endpoint, but rather the movement backward and forward, an alterna Effective Temperaments son, so that a definite decision (“ endgültige Entscheidung ”) is no longer possible.

(1980: 165)

The person is caught in a sort of decisional and agentic fibrillation, unable to resolve the ambivalence of being simultaneously moved toward two opposite directions. Rather than a loss of hope, the core of despair is an inexcruciable indecision, that cannot be solved by making a pragmatic choice, resulting in a profound alteration of temporality: “what previ ously came about in the mode of succession, now appears only in the necessity of simul taneity” ( Tellenbach 1980: 167).

Similarly to the paralysis of lived time, despair also impacts lived space as the juxtapose son of alternative choices, in a sort of indecision cramp, jeopardizes the sequential order of actions, leading to a frenzied restlessness.

(p. 808) The Pre-Melancholic Phase as Situation In this context, the phenomenological concept of “situation” illuminates hidden aspects of the relationship between the person and the triggering interpersonal event that instant Utes the transition to despair and ultimately to a melancholic episode. Indeed, the TM, with his inflexible value structure and hierarchic (although reliable and sacrificial) way of understanding life, invariably co-creates relational situations that gradually destabilize his vulnerability. Concretely, the TM is caught between the latent goal of complying in ad Dance with the presumed expectations of the others and a high interpersonal sensitivity, constantly sharpened by his concern for orderliness and conscientiousness, intolerance of ambiguity and hyper/heteronomia. Therefore, in his permanent striving for social desire ability (in the very impersonal and conventional sense of contextual social standards), he recursively approaches situations characterized by an unrestrained increase of the fixed tasks that gradually overwhelms his capacity to preserve predetermined order. Caught in such imbalance, the TM fails to strategically discriminate what can be momentarily prior Sized or left aside. In phenomenological terms the pre-melancholic phase is catalyzed by two “situative constellations” (i.e. includence and remanence ) that later induce the Wadi cal transformation of the self–world relation constituting the despair. Specifically, spatial “ includence ” indicates the self-contradiction of the TM actively at tempting to meticulously maintain a homeostatic order while constantly expanding be Bond his own limits and capabilities; whereas temporal “ remanence ” designates paradox cal tendency of canceling possible debts in advance, with the danger of remaining behind oneself with respect to personal expectations, emerging duties, as well as the irreducible unpredictability of the unforeseen. Both “includence” and “remanence” are to be under stood as complementary and latent modes of being in the interpersonal world, actualized by the structural features of the TM. Despair intervenes at the confluence of the two situ Dative constellations and experientially translates the pre-melancholic phase into the melancholic one.

Effective Temperaments # Temperaments and Effective Phenomenology Since early hyppocratic conceptualizations, the status of temperaments within the broad er sphere of mood phenomena has been central, although with phenomenologically elu chive borders. Indeed, temperaments are not discernible just in terms of subjective mental states and in a clinical setting surface almost inferentially on the basis of both self-de Ascription and observational exploration, particularly of the reaction styles triggered by ex Vernal stimuli as well as of behavioral expressions of the person. Concretely, if emotions are psychologically discernible, intentional states with relatively specific determinants (i.e. they are directed at particular objects, events, and situations) and circumscribed time frame, and moods are broader and less focused, atmospheric feeling-states that pre determine inchoate Effective salience, temperaments are those background bio-psychic organizers that confer the rhythm and the Effective attunement between the two. That is, they precondition the background orientation and mood coloring as well as the actualization of unfocused, global feeling-states into specific emotions.

(p. 809) Therefore, phenomenological investigations of abnormal human subjectivity while emphasizing a shift of attention from mere symptom aggregates (i.e. state-like indexes matching diagnostic polythetic criteria) to a broader range of phenomena (i.e. trait-like features of a given life-world that are coherent expressions of underlying vulnerability to ward the potential development of a certain type of disorder), also encourage an in-depth dissection of Effective phenomena and related anomalies. In this sense, for example, rec ognizing a personality structure such as the TM has important implications in under standing the clinical evolution of minor and major mood episodes, including the direction of the polarity and the symptom formation of acute mood episodes.

Although the modern concept of Effective temperaments has been operationalized mostly in a clinical descriptive framework, primarily based on the works of Kraepelin and Kretschmer, important empirical and theoretical cover Fences with phenomenology suggest that TM’s infrastructure is a potentially relevant modulator of inter-morbid and long-term trajectory of mood disorders, constituting a trait-like vulnerability factor. However, whereas Tellenbach systematic work has been substantially re-annexed to con temporary research, essential phenomenological intuition from Kretschmer remains largely under-recognized. This is the case of the two kretschmerian axes—cycloid and schizoid—and their immanent articulation in psychic tempo, psychomotility, and mood proportion. This coincides with the phenomenological intuition of the interconnectedness between lived time, lived space and the coherent way of finding oneself in the world along the continuum of Effective reactivity (anesthetic and hyperaesthetic) and mood ori entation (from joy to sadness).

Effective Temperaments # Conclusions A phenomenological approach to Effective temperaments is fundamentally aimed at im proving the cross-sectional and prospective understanding the subjective nuances of af fictive states as well as their potential pathogenetic trajectories, through the lens of cer Cain prototypical descriptors and organizers. Among those, the anthropological structure of the TM is an example of pre-pathologic, dispositional vulnerability to Effective spec rum disorders, whereas the kretschmerian tripod (i.e. mood proportion, psychic tempo, and psychomotility) is an equally important clinical prism to discern the relative schizoand cycle-thymic axes. Finally, it is worth highlighting that an accurate clinical-psy chopathological exploration of Effective temperaments is essential for a clinically rational identification of qualitative thresholds along a continuum of severity from generic helpseeking to high-risk and overt Effective syndromes. PAGE_BREAK “They are communicative, adapt themselves readily to new conj sons, but soon they again long for change and variety. Without suffix sent reason they change... psi son, are always beginning some thing new, make large plans and after a short time drop them again.... They speak readily and much... In conversation, the pa taints assume a free and easy tone, give... ironical answers,...

sought-out allusions.... They make great claims and behave ar rogantly.... they are extraordinary ily distractible, and seek to escape in every way from the constraint of a systematic mental training...

The train of thought is desultory, incoherent, aimless; judgment is hasty and shallow” (1921: 125– 129).

Effective Temperaments Irritable • mixture of manic and de pressie fea Cures • Wavy mood coloring main ly dominated by irritability • conduct of life was sub Sect to the most multifar Nous incidents Cy • frequent, clothymic more or less regular fluctu Cations of the psychic state to the manic or to the de pressie side Page 14 of 15 “In general, the patients are per Baps cheerful... but periods are interpolated in which they are Cirri table and ill-humored, also per Baps sad, spiritless, anxious; they display from youth up extraordi Warily great fluctuations in emo tonal equilibrium and are greatly moved by all experiences, fre quently in an unpleasant way....

They are easily offended and hottempered;... and on the most trivial occasions fall into outbursts of boundless fury.... In the family also they are insufferable, Capri sous,... have attacks of Deal Busy.... Their power of imagine son is usually very much influx Inced by moods and feelings. It, therefore, comes easily to deli signal interpretations of the events of life” (1921: 130–131).

“These are the people who con scantly oscillate... between the two opposite poles of mood, some times ‘rejoicing to the skies’, some times ‘sad as death’. To-day lively, sparkling,... full of the joy of life, the pleasure of enterprise,... af ter some time they meet us de pressed,... ill-humored, in need of rest. A patient... said that she was ‘like a barometer, one time so, another time different’.... At first these deviations from the middle line are only occasionally percepti ble once in a way and as rapidly passing attacks; but for the most part they have the tendency to re turn more frequently and to last al ways longer, indeed finally to fill up the whole life” (1921: 131–132).

Effective Temperaments Andrea Raballo Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Department of Psychology Lorenzo Pelizza Department of Mental Health and Addiction, Reggie Emilia Public Health Center Effective Temperaments Andrea Raballo Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Department of Psychology Lorenzo Pelizza Department of Mental Health and Addiction, Reggie Emilia Public Health Center Schizophrenic Autism # Schizophrenic Autism Richard G.T. Gimps and Sanneke de Naan The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Apr 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Schizophrenic autism, as originally intended by Eugene Bleuler, signifies a pathognomic form of motivated unmooring from the world into a state of asocial fantasy. In this article we discuss the unity of the three key aspects of this autism: (i) an altered relation to real ty; (ii) a distinctive fantasy-involving form of thinking; and (iii) a motivated retreat from the world. Phenomenological psychiatry deepens our understanding of (i) by theorizing it in terms of disturbed pre-reflective intersubjective engagement, yet it deprecates the cri Beria of (ii) fantasy and (iii) motivation. We question the assumptions behind this depreca son, re-theorizing (ii) as withdrawal to a state in which a fantasy/reality distinction is compromised, and reinstating the motivational criterion (iii) through recovering a proper ly pre-reflective conception of dynamic motivation. The result is a conception of autism which preserves the unity of Bleuler’s concept by unifying phenomenological and psycho analytical perspectives on the intersubjective constitution of selfhood.

Keywords: autism, schizophrenia, phenomenology, psychoanalysis, fantasy, intersubjectivity, motivation # Introducing Bleuler’s Autism THE concept of “autism” was introduced to psychiatry by Eugene Bleuler who also coined the term “schizophrenia.” “Schizophrenia” arrived in 1908, “autism” in 1910; both were introduced to the wider world in Bleuler’s 1911 monograph Dementia Praecox doer 1 Grippe der Schizophrenien. Distinctly schizophrenic disturbances, he contended, were characterized at root by disturbances of the three “A”s of association, affectivity, and am bivalence; these underpinned further symptoms including the central disturbance in real ty contact he called autism. What today often denotes a developmental condition or Visor der (“early infantile autism,” or “autistic spectrum disorder” (autism spectrum disorder)) started out as a de scriptor for a pathognomonic manner of being met with in schizophrenia. Phenomenology cal psychiatry continues to deploy it in this sense. In fact, even in the early writings of the autism spectrum disorder forerunners Asperger and Banner (1943 ), the term is primarily used adjecti ally (“autistic”) to describe the character of certain disturbances of Effective contact in Schizophrenic Autism children. Yet whereas the children described by Banner suffered a deficit in Effective con tact ab initio, the adult patients described by Bleuler had instead detached from a reality with which they had previously enjoyed emotional relations.

To understand the significance of the psychopathological question “what is schizophrenic autism?” it is important to start in the right place—which here means not simply assume ing a positivist conception of nosology from the get-go. For, agree or not with its methods, classical psychopathology dissociative identity disorder not take itself to do well by proceeding positivistically, enu Aerating operationally defined signs and symptoms and merely collocating them into a construct designated “schizophrenia.” Instead it took itself to be investigating the distinct Dive, intuitively recognizable, delusion-engendering alteration in self-state and world-Bela son underlying such signs and symptoms, even if—as Jasper (1963: 96) wrote—“a clear presentation is hardly possible with so alien a happening.” For the phenomenologist, re Elective understanding of precisely what is distinctive about this state is not to be dis posed of through lapsing instead into criteria checklists but, rather, to be pursued through the careful (p. 813) description of what intuitively were paradigmatic cases, which description does not shy away from deploying such metaphoric and philosophic concepts as are apt to and revelatory of its object (Minkowski 1927/1987: 190–191).

Schizophrenia, Bleuler tells us (1911/1950: 63–67), is characterized by a very peculiar alteration of the relation between the patient’s inner life and the external world. The inner life assumes pathological predomi Dance (autism).... The most severe schizophrenics, who have no more contact with the outside world, live in a world of their own. They have encased themselves with their desire and wishes (which they consider fulfilled) or occupy themselves with the trials and tribulations of their persecutor ideas; they have cut them selves off as much as possible from any contact with the external world.... This detachment from reality, together with the relative and absolute predominance of the inner life, we term autism.... In less severe cases... patients are still able to move about in the external world but... everything which is in contradiction to their complexes simply does not exist for their thinking or feeling.... The autistic world has as much reality for the patient as the true one, but his is a different kind of reality.... In milder cases the real and autistic worlds exist not only side by side, but often become entangled with one another in the most illogical manner.

The doctor is at one moment not only the hospital-physician and at another the shoemaker, S., but he is both in the same thought-content of the patient.... Wish es and fears constitute the contents of autistic thinking.... The autistic thinking is the source of delusions, of the crude offenses against logic and propriety, and all the other pathological symptoms.

Bleuler (1911/1950: 63 n. 19) explains to us that his coinage is nearly coterminous with Freud’s autoerotism but that he chose a new term since Freud’s greatly expanded sense of Bros/libido can mislead. He also notes that, unlike Janet’s quite general concept of “loss of the sense of reality” (i.e. diminished “function du rel”), he considers autism to charac Schizophrenic Autism terize the patient’s reality relation only in the ambit of her unconscious emotional com Flexes. Bleuler’s “autism” meant a circumscribed withdrawal from reality—into what to day we might call a “psychic retreat” or “autistic enclave” — 2 prompted by unbearable emotional experiences. According to Bleuler, it is this withdraw al which conditions the flourishing of delusional experience and thought—experience and thought which still express the trace of the unconscious complex that evoked them (Jung 1907/1936). Precisely what is the character of this retreat is our concern in this article.

The psychopathological significance of autism—that is, of this “very peculiar alteration” of the relation between inner life and external world—is that it is pathognomonic of schizo ophrenia. There is, undeniably, much diversity (of expression, course, and outcome) amongst the manifest symptoms of what Bleuler termed “the schizophrenics”. There are also, undeniably, other important pathognomic features of schizophrenic selfhood (especially radical disruptions in ego identity, coherence, demarcation, vitality, and agency ) which are not simply a function of autism. Nevertheless, it is autism in particular which is intuitively sensed in the clinician’s “ praecox Gefühl ” (a distinctive resonance to schizophrenic disturbance which has been argued to be a Deli able indicator of schizophrenia for phenomenologically skilled clinicians (Schwartz and Wiggins 1987; Rube 2006; Vargas (p. 814) 2013—although cf. Ungvari et al. 2010), and autism which marks what is distinctly psychotic or delusional about the patient’s think ing. Lose the significance of such distinctive organizing Gestalten as autism and the selfdisturbances, and we lose the rationale for a phenomenologically meaningful typification of psychopathological experience, and risk collapsing back into banal symptom checklists or objective psychological descriptions of altered cognition that do nothing to thematize the distinctiveness of schizophrenic existence.

Bleuler’s (1911/1950) concept of “autism” covers a lot of ground; a standard criticism of it has it that it covers too much. Thus we find within his concept all of: 1. an altered relation to reality, 2. a distinctive fantasy-involving form of thinking, and 3. a motivated retreat from the world.

Some clinicians who combine something of a phenomenological and psychoanalytical dis position follow Bleuler in preserving the gamut of (i)-(ii)- (iii). Phenomenologically, yet largely non-psychoanalytically, minded clinicians instead develop a restricted, yet phenomenologically deepened, con caption of autism as (i)—that is, as a defective pre-reflective vital attunement with reality which ramifies through the forms of thought and experience, imbuing all the psy chopathology that arises with a distinctively schizophrenic onus. Non-phenomenological, yet psychoanalytically-inclined, clinicians (e.g. Legal 1977/1990; Freeman, Cameron, and McGhie 1958 ), by contrast, rather focus their attention on (ii)-(iii); thus Legal’s distinct son between symbolic equation and symbolism proper maps directly onto Bleuler’s dis Schizophrenic Autism tinction between autistic and realistic thought. Clinicians who, whilst having neither incl nation, yet remain attached to the concept, restrict their attention to an under-theorized version of (i). Others appear to abandon autism, yet somehow hope to retain a coherent concept of “schizophrenia.” Per Baps rather improbably they try to reconstruct what is pathognomic about it in terms of a disturbance of the form of thought (e.g. in atypical association or invalid logic). Indeed, Bleuler’s own modestly psychoanalytic and Patently phenomenological sensibilities some times gave way to a largely associationist schematism (Bleuler 1911/1950: Section tenth).

In the next section we consider the depth of understanding which a phenomenological ap roach has brought to the understanding of (i) the autistic unmooring of pre-reflective re laity contact. That which follows considers (ii) the significance of fantasy, and in the final section we consider (iii) the essentially motivational aspect to an autistic retreat to om nipotent fantasy, thereby completing our deepened understanding of Bleuler’s fundamen tal conceptualization of the autistic core of schizophrenic life.

Altered Relation to Reality: Phenomenological # Perspectives Both early and contemporary phenomenology cal (p. 815) theorists of schizophrenic autism stress disturbances in pre-reflective worldengagement as definitive of schizophrenic autism.

To situate the phenomenological psychiatrists’ discussions of autistic selfhood it is imper ant first to rehearse the phenomenological philosophers’ conceptualization of selfhood as being-in-the-world. And to understand the phenomenological understanding of selfhood as being-in-the-world it is important first to grasp its motivation—which is to resist those dualistic conceptions of selfhood, widespread in our scientific and philosophical culture, which alienate us from our bodies, from one another, from our cultural resources, and from the physical environment.

The assumption of such dualistic conceptions is that we may understand what a self is in dependently of its relations to other selves, to its body, to language and other cultural practices, and to its proximal environment. Having accepted such assumptions the theorist’s task then becomes explaining how an inner self makes contact with a separate, outer, other/body/world.

By contrast, phenomenologists such as Heidegger (1927/1978) and Merleau-Monty (1945/2002, 1964/1968) consider their task to be the unity-preserving description of an intrinsically embodied, cultural, and relational selfhood. As they understand it, we do not encounter one another as pre-individuated Gonads, but rather enjoy such determinate in dividuality as we possess in virtue of our recurrently-enacted differentiation from one an other. Such differentiation not only individuates the self but places the self and other in Schizophrenic Autism intrinsically comprehending forms of moral and emotional relation (I am angry at her for stealing my book). The same goes for self and objects: we become distinguished as deter minute acting, perceiving, and understanding selves as we develop comprehending intel tonal relations of perception and action to the objects with which we interact. These per ceptual and active relations do not enjoy an intentionality derivative of that intrinsic to the philosophically concocted “inner representations” of a pre-individuated “inner mind.” Rather they are replete with their own sui genesis intentionality. Skills such as language use, and the more complex and determinate opportunities for understanding which it af fords, are also not soldered on top of intrinsically non-linguistic corporeal foundations like a man on a horse or even like a centaur. Instead the best picture we have of the relation of linguistic and bodily sensibilities is simply that of the developing man himself: someone whose reality-relating motor performances in speech and writing because, with increase ing enculturation, more and more complex and sensitive to the interactive situations of their performance. Finally, whilst we do engage in cognitive activity which is disengaged, deliberative, and abstract (e.g. in theoretical reasoning carried out in inner speech), this is a derivative refinement of, rather than a foundation for, our everyday interactive Napa Abilities (e.g. the practical ability to engage in conversation).

The significance of a phenomenological conception for the understanding of schizo phrenic autism is that it allows us to understand just how intimately connected are disturb Dances of everyday immersed relations to reality and disturbances of the integrity of self hood. A dualistically conceived self is, one might say, already disconnected in its being from reality and from other selves—yet is not thought of as disturbed on that basis alone. An embodied interactive self, by contrast, is constituted by its participation with others and in its environmental situations. Disturb such participatory relations and the self itself falls apart since these relations constitute its being. Far from the sanity of outer world-re Cations being derivative of that of an inner self, the two can—once we drop the dualistic inner–outer picture—be seen as of a piece.

(p. 816) Minkowski (1927/1987) —himself more a Bergson aficionado, but whose thought (like Bergson’s) is resonant with much in phenomenology—summarizes this self-destroy ing disconnect as a loss of “vital contact with reality.” The kind of contact which concerns him is no mere ability to abstractly represent reality, but rather that which founds such representational capacities, namely our lived (“vital”) participatory indwelling. As one of his patients famously described it: “I can reason quite well, but only in the absolute, because I have lost contact with life” ( Minkowski 1927/1987: 210).

This contact, engagement, or resonance amounts to an ability to act appropriately with out prior deliberation. A patient we once interviewed talked of realizing that his “human ty” had returned and his (schizophrenic) “illness” had left him the moment that, rightly judging his nieces to be in danger as they played too close to a ride at a funfair, he Upon taneously emerged from his autistic state to rush over and scoop them up. We may also bring to mind those temporary respites from loss of reality contact in long-stay psych attic patients who, faced with an emergency like a flood or a fire, come out of their Data Schizophrenic Autism tonic stupor and provide help or make an orderly escape. A difficulty of maintaining such automatic, pre-reflective attunement to what matters is termed by Blankenburg a “crisis of common sense” or, following his patient Anne, a lack of “natural selfevidence”: “What is it that I really lack? Something so small, so odd, but so important that you cannot live without it... What I lack really is the ‘natural self-evidence’... It has simply to do with living, with living properly, that you are not so outside, outside of society, so expelled.... But I cannot find the right word for that which is lacking... I can never be properly present and participate.... It is simply, I don’t know, not knowledge... Every child knows it! One usually just naturally picks it up. It is these simple things a human being needs to be able to live.”

The schizophrenia sufferer may succumb to what Minkowski called “morbid rationalism”: that is, suffer the replacing of, or actively compensate for, a disconnected know-how and instinct with abstract knowledge and involuntary or deliberative reflection (also called “hyperreflexivity”). Even though the morbid rationalist may be lost in excessively abstract reason rather than (as Bleuler allegedly has it) excessive imagination, the term “autism” still ap plies, Minkowski suggests, because the sufferer’s thinking “no longer seeks to be inch grated with reality.” The sufferer herself may be attempting to safely compensate for destabilizing damage to participatory know-how through engaging with the world in a de liberative and reflective vein. However her disconnected thinking cannot, from this topdown vantage point, achieve its necessary footing in the unquestioned instinctive certain ties of daily life. Moreover, by reflecting on what is normally tacitly taken for granted, alienation from the world and others is increased rather than dissolved.

It is important to note that this know-how is not best understood as task competence (e.g. knowing how to change a light bulb). Rather what matters is, on the whole, a capacity for ongoing, intuitively apt and flexible, synchronized attunement with the world. The autistic individual no longer participates in the environment’s particular rhythm of ambient becoming, but rather marches to the beat of her own drum. Or Multi Lately—since the beat of this drum is constituted through the self’s relatedness—to an incoherent beat, or merely to a delusional semblance of a beat.

A disturbance in the rhythms of such background coordination and participation is partic ularly acute in interpersonal relations. Kimura highlights this with his notion (p. 817) of disturbances of the “in-between.” People are who they are in their relations. On a dualistic conception, conversations are possible because what meets are distinct pre-de limited selves who have things to tell each other. On a phenomenological conception, by contrast, the selves are what they are in and through such meetings; neither conversation nor selfhood enjoys ontological primacy—instead they are, to use Heidegger’s term, equiprimordial. Interactions structure selfhood, so the self which withdraws from interact son risks impoverishment and disintegration. On the other hand, the self which stays in Schizophrenic Autism such interactions as are marked by intrapersonal or interpersonal conflict risks breaking apart unless additional self-protective measures are deployed.

In summary, the phenomenological perspective aims to re-theorize what Bleuler intended by way of autistic disconnection from reality through its conception of a dislocation of pre-reflective participatory indwelling. The phenomenological psychopathologists under stand autism as a dislocation from the world which may inspire and/or be fed by hyper reflexive, morbidly rationalistic, attempts to compensate with reason for what has been lost by way of instinct. Schizophrenic idiosyncrasy and delusion is seen as launching, and taking its distinctive form from, the bodily unmooring of the artistically disconnected sub Sect.

Whilst this dislocation surely indexes a fundamental, pathognomic aspect of schizo phrenic psychopathology, and one which Bleuler din’t have the conceptual resources to adequately interpret, it isn’t clear that it yet captures enough of what is distinctive in schizophrenic autism. For what distinguishes Bleuler’s autism is not merely that it sign Dies (i) the negatively characterizable condition of disconnection from reality, but that it also involves, as the other side of this coin, (ii) a positively characterizable condition of preoccupation by an alternative domain which Bleuler hoped to characterize in terms of substitutive and unassailable fantasy (Bleuler 1911/1950: 373). This disconnected and dreamlike autistic world is part-constituted by wishes and fears, may coexist alongside re laity-relations (“double-bookkeeping”), and—so the theory goes—provides the soil strum Cure in which “delusions... and all the other pathological symptoms” grow. The following two sections aim to recapture what is further distinctive to autism in a way which yet re Aspects the non-dualistic conception of selfhood offered by existential phenomenology.

Autistic Fantasy Versus Realistic Thought While phenomenological psychiatry deepens our understanding of (i) disturbances of co ordinate, immersed, self-structuring participation in the world, it does not deepen our understanding of, but instead simply rejects the significance of (ii) fantasy-ridden inward preoccupation. As Paras, Covet, and Zahavi (2002 ) comment, “the criterion ‘withdrawal to fantasy life’ is empirically false, if taken as a necessary one: there are seemingly extra Averted schizophrenics (e.g. certain disorganized patients) as well as patients who do not have a rich fantasy life.” Yet criteria as such are not empirically true or false—instead they delineate the concepts which frame empirical judgments. And Bleuler already recon Sized what Paras et al. note: the alternative autistic world of the schizophrenic patient may well be impoverished, and may coexist with, rather than displace, the extrovert schizophrenic’s (p. 818) participation in reality (Bleuler 1911/1950: 65, 88). Given this we may legitimately wonder whether contemporary phenomenological psychiatrists have yet adequately grasped the significance of fantasy to autistic reality—and whether we can find an understanding of it that allows it to take its place at a conceptual table which the phenomenologist would recognize as properly set.

Schizophrenic Autism When justifying his coining of “autism” as distinct from Freud’s reworking of Havelock Ellis’s “autoeroti[ci]sm,” Bleuler (1911/1950: 63 n. 19) mentions his wish to avoid what he saw as Freud’s unusually broad conception of Eros. What he does’t mention here is what in fact was his contention with Freud over whether an infant starts out life in an autistic domain of fantasy governed by the pleasure principle (hallucinatory wish-fulfillment), gradually making her way out to realistic thought governed by the reality principle, or whether the capacity for fantasy is rather a developmental achievement presupposing re laity-contact. Freud and Piaget thought the former, Bleuler and Vygotsky the latter. The debate is partly about developmental chronology, but more importantly about the very intelligibility of ascribing coherent fantasy either to an infant who has not yet learned to make relevant reality discrimination or to a psychotic adult whose reality function has become compromised.

The debate is one on which phenomenology has a bearing. If we start from that dualistic conception of intentional life which phenomenology disputes, a conception which sees mental life as self-standingly inner, it is easy to feel the attraction of Freud’s and Piaget’s standpoint. For on such a conception there seems nothing wrong in principle with sug Besting that inner fantasy may precede or take over from outer reality contact. Yet if we take seriously the phenomenological conception of mind as structured in and by its worldrelations, fantasy can hardly be given such a self-standing role. For reality contact now becomes not something abrogated by, but rather the condition of possibility of, genuine mental functions such as fantasy. But, one then might think, if reality contact is fantasy’s condition of possibility, and reality contact is precisely what is disturbed in schizophrenia, then considerations of fantasy are irrelevant to the constitution of schizophrenic autism.

Yet to suppose this the end of the issue against (ii) the fantasy-invoking criterion ignores the possibility of a deeper phenomenological reinterpretation of Bleuler’s criterion. Con seeder again the phenomenological conception of selfhood as equiprimordial with relation to non-self. A key contention of that conception is that self and other co-arise —that their oppositional configuration is essential to their identity. This, we propose, is also the strum Cure of the relation between fantasy and reality perception. Essential to being a true imagine or believer is being able to entertain a possibility in one’s mind whilst knowing that this (in the case of belief) may not be, or perhaps (in the case of fantasy) is definitely not, a fact. If we turn now to Bleuler’s (ii) fantasy criterion, the significance is not so much that one is “lost in a fantasy world” but that one is lost to the world in such a way that a distinction between fantasy and reality no longer finds instantiation in the form of one’s thought.

A superficial, merely epistemic, gloss could be given to this, and it is indeed tempting to offer such a reading of the artist’s situation—as if the problem were that, whilst there is yet a fact of the matter as to whether his thoughts are fantasies or genuine beliefs, he no longer (p. 819) knows what that fact of the matter is. Bleuler (1911/1950: 373–374) re ports Pelletier saying that “above all, the patient does not differentiate anymore between reality and fantasy,” yet of this Bleuler says that whilst it is “true in a certain sense” it still does “not get at the essence of” autism. The deeper suggestion he grasps for is that, in Schizophrenic Autism autistic states, there is an “inadequate or absent distinction between fantasy and reality” themselves (Bleuler 1911/1950: 374).

On this ontological, rather than epistemological, conception, becoming lost in autistic states involves becoming lost to states of mind in which imagination and reality-oriented thought are collapsed and so no longer constitute themselves as such in a mutual antago ism. The coin which has (i) an altered relation to reality as one of its faces has, we can now see, as its other (ii) an indistinction between reality and fearful (e.g. paranoid) or wishful (e.g. grandiose) fantasy. It is just what Freud (1919/1985: 367) called this “Duncan ny effect... produced by effacing the distinction between imagination and reality” which provides the disturbed soil from which grows the varieties of delusional thought and deli signal experience. A healthy soil gives rise to a mind which can have both true and false beliefs, yet the autistic loss of “reality contact” runs deeper than any mere falsity of belief —to a state of mind-negating indistinction between the fantastic and the real.

Ling well describes the corrosive effects of autism on the meaningfulness of both realistic and fantastic thought in his account of the tragic patient who styled herself “the ghost of the weed garden”: Reality dissociative identity disorder not cast its shadow or its light over any wish or fear.... Every wish met with instantaneous phantom fulfillment and every dread likewise instant neously came to pass in a phantom way. Thus she could be anyone, anywhere, any time. “I’m Rita Hayworth, I’m Joan Blondel. I’m a Royal Queen. My royal name is Julianne.” “She’s self-sufficient,” she told me. “She’s the self-possessed.” But this self-possession was double-edged. It had also its dark side. She was a girl “pos Fessed” by the phantom of her own being. Her self had no freedom, autonomy, or power in the real world. Since she was anyone she cared to mention, she was no one.

As Ling carefully articulates, the boons of the autistic state include a removal of the predicaments of the terrors of self-dissolution in the face of an unassimilable reality. Such terrors can be mitigated by delusionally reconfiguring them into thinkable fears of Terse cation or omnipotent wish fulfillment. Yet the costs of disturbing one’s reality contact in this way are also considerable. For now the persecuting others are just as real—and just as unreal—as the reassuring therapist, and the autistic retreat becomes an autistic prison when there is no possibility of escaping from fear into what in its better moments can be a relatively reassuring, benign and nourishing reality.

The psychopathological significance of the Bleulerian criterion for autism of (ii) a with drawl to fantasy life—or what with more phenomenological accuracy we may describe as withdrawal from a life in which fantasy and reality are distinct to a mode of being in which fantasy and reality are no longer distinct—is that it allows us to understand the unassailable form taken by schizophrenic delusion as a function of the autistic state. We turn now to Bleuler’s conception of this withdrawal as (iii) motivated to see what light this may shed on delusional content.

Schizophrenic Autism # (p. 820) Motivated Retreat: The Psychodynamics of # Autistic Withdrawal The conception of autism we now have on the conceptual table goes beyond the phenomenologists’ (i) disturbed pre-reflective attunement to include as its transverse side (ii) the inward collapse of the living dialectic of imagination and reality-oriented thought. Part (iii) of Bleuler’s conception of autism is that a retreat to this state is motivationally— i.e. psychodynamically—explicable. This has been rejected by phenomenologists from Minkowski (1927/1987) to Paras and Covet (1991 ) who instead lean toward a non-psy choanalytic, merely neurobiological, explanation of disturbed attunement. We contend that this rejection of (iii) risks further impoverishing our understanding of schizophrenic autism.

In what follows we take Minkowski’s discussion as exemplary of a tendency in phenom nological psychiatry to presuppose an untenable dualism of matters psychodynamic and neurobiological. Due to this presupposition it fails to draw on the anti-dualistic resources of philosophical phenomenology, fails to pay careful phenomenological attention to what is manifest by way of unconscious motivation in its own case material, misconstrues un conscious motivation in terms of an implausible conscious intentionality, and deprives us of a clear vision of how delusional form and delusional content can be of a piece. We make no claim that this criterion (iii) is non-defensible; there may be clinical cases in which there is reason to talk of autism in the absence of motivation. Our claim however is that Effective motivation belongs properly and fundamentally to intentional life and real ty contact, and that we should therefore need special reason to read its contribution out of, rather than reason to read it in to, the autistic situation.

According to Bleuler the retreat to autistic fantasy occurs in the ambit of the schizophrenic’s complexes. The thought is simple and has been intuitively expressed by the poets: the schizophrenic, when it conflicts with his basic needs and threatens a hat Bering shame, “cannot bear very much of reality”. The retreat to the autistic state is akin to being lured to the devitalized world of the “aery folk” because “the world’s more full of weeping than you can understand” ( Yeats 1886/2011). The delusional thoughts and experiences with which he is now involved make spuriously intelligible, give an unreal appearance of manageability to, and symbolically undo, the shattering wounds he suffers. By reverse-engineering these manifest delusional thoughts and experiences we may discern the latent wounds.

Although Minkowski expresses some skepticism about Bleuler’s psychodynamic concept alization, his own case material appears to support it. Consider the case (Minkowski 1927/1987: 208) of a man who, when out walking, “was sometimes struck with the ap pearance of a woman. He would then return to his house, sit down on a chair, cross his arms and take up a position as symmetrical as possible to reflect on the event. He would try to solve the problem of why a woman’s body made a particular impression on a man.” Minkowski describes his morbid rationality beautifully, but gives no thought at all to what Schizophrenic Autism is here being sublimated in the bizarre attempts to solve a putatively intellectual problem —that is, the practical problem of how to get the desirable woman into his bed.

(p. 821) Or consider the case (Minkowski and Targowla 1885/2001) of Paul, a socially withdrawn 17-year-old schoolboy, whose morbid rationality and diminished vital contact with reality are again described beautifully. Just before his autism set in, Paul “seems to have been preoccupied with questions of a sexual nature; he would question his father and ask him for explanations, revealing a complete ignorance of the subject.” At bedtime Paul would take more than an hour ensuring the handkerchief was placed perfectly under the bolster [ sic]. He also spent hours in the bathroom, explaining this in terms of his pre occupation with the size of a feather duster in there, the exact time he entered, or the size of the crack at the door’s base and whether he may be seen through it—which latter thought, Paul alleges, troubles him not at all. Again, it is hardly a great step to detect here a defensive retreat into autism from various sexual troubles. Minkowski and Tar gowla state that the “sexual curiosity that appears at the outset of the illness, which could be considered for that reason a point of departure, can only be a precursory sign of the interrogative attitude that takes a firm hold afterwards. In any case, it is this attitude that must be rectified before attending to anything else.” Why it might not instead be that 3 the sexual confusion continued to inspire the autistic retreat is just not considered.

Consider, finally, the case (Minkowski 1927/1987: 210) of the schizophrenic woman who “in an advanced stage of her illness, passed the time making hats for herself. She had made 16 of them. One day, she lost two of them. As a form of retaliation against this she decided to break two of her mother’s 16 cups.” Once again we’re not here going out on a limb if we risk a hypothesis about the symbolic resonance of the hats, cups, and break ages—for example, that the patient made hats to provide herself with her own version of that which she enviously felt her mother to cherish and withhold, so that, following her loss, she was driven to even the score by breaking two of her mother’s cups.

Against the suggestion that the retreat to a split-off autistic state could be motivated, Minkowksi (1953: 212–213) writes that “This loss—or, if we attribute it to the activity of the subject, this suppression—of tonality, can be but the result of an act of violence, of a punch as it were. It is here that the verb ‘to split’ achieves its full meaning, without... this in any sense referring to a deliberate and conscious action. The difference between this state of affairs and putting your head in the sand is here particularly clear.” Later, in describing how the autistic state and the activity of self–world severance are the same phenomenon seen from different angles, he reasserts just “how cautious we must be in 4 speaking here of ‘activity’.” Yet as Ling notes, Minkowski also cites a patient who reported of himself that “I suppressed feeling as I suppressed all reality. I dug a moat around me.” And as Ling also goes on to say, what we meet with here is the early twenty eth-century phenomenological psychiatrist’s bafflement at the concept of the dynamic un conscious.

Nobody could disagree with this, yet it speaks not at all against a psychodynamic concept son of autism as motivationally intelligible world-withdrawal in the face of emotionally in Schizophrenic Autism tolerable conflict. The key point is that activity may be emotionally motivated without be ing consciously willed and deliberative. Our question is whether, as Bleuler and Jung dis Bern, (p. 822) autistic unworlding and consequent delusion obtain principally in the ambit of the patient’s active complexes, and so may be motivationally intelligible as a response to overwhelming conflict that reality contact presents for them, or whether it is only intelligible in neurobiological terms. With regard to Minkowski’s patient who described himself as having “dug a moat around me”: the fact that it’s hard to imagine this as a se Dies of individually intended conscious acts of suppression and “digging” in no way speaks against our taking it as an emotionally motivated activity, one which even the patient no ices he has been undertaking.

Even though phenomenological attention to the above case studies of delusional expert Fences promotes a motivational understanding, phenomenological psychiatrists typically refer to neurobiological Taus es rather than psychodynamically intelligible motivations when it comes to understanding the development of delusions. The question arises as to why these should be taken as ex Elusive, rather than the neurobiological factors providing part of the corporeal instantia son of the motivational ones.

One possibility is that a currently popular understanding of schizophrenia as a disturb Dance of a so-called “minimal self” obscures the psychodynamics of delusion develop Bent. Our thought here is that the more schizophrenia gets relayed at an ever more “ba sic” or “minimal” level, and accordingly explained in terms of “low-level” causes, the less room there appears to be for motivational factors—on the further assumption, that is, that motives are too “high-level” to be operative in this minimal self.

Against such a reconstructed conception we should like to reiterate that the motivational structure at stake in schizophrenic autism should not be misunderstood as conscious, de liberate reasoning. If one does think of psychodynamic processes as belonging to the do main of intentional contrivance, then there might well seem to be a gap between the dis turbances of the self at a basic level and the domain of psychodynamic motivation. In this way it may start to seem as if deep disturbances of world-involvement must belong to neurobiology rather than to psychodynamic psychology. This points to a second concern: that it is hard to see how we may equate “basic” with “neurobiological” as opposed to “psychological” without opening up a problematic duality between neurobiological causes and psychological motivations. As phenomenologists we ought to be suspicious of any such dualism. The point is reinforced within psychoanalysis itself which introduced its concept of the “drive” precisely to overcome this dualism: physiological and psychological processes being united in the unitary phenomenon of the drive. From such a perspective a conflict between the imperatives of two or more neurologically sup ported drives constitutes the complexes that motivate autistic unworlding.

When riven with such a conflict and pulled in two directions I may possess enough ego capacity to mentally accommodate both sides of my ambivalence—or, even better, to Schizophrenic Autism achieve an integrative sublation (health). Failing that I may repress one half of the qua son (neurosis)—or perhaps, if things go well, at least sublimate half the incompatible de sires into more congenial forms. Or, if the above options are unavailable, I may detach from reality and enter the substitutive autistic domain (psychosis). Autistic withdrawal, on this model, is psychological and biological at the same time. Which, after all—given that we are bodily beings whose physiology and psychology cannot be seen apart from our striving, motivated, caring, being-in-the-world—is what we should expect.

(p. 823) Conclusions If Bleuler’s nascently phenomenological and more fully psychoanalytic vision is apt we ought to find autism obtaining in the ambit of the complexes. This is not to say that deli signal thought in schizophrenia ought to only ever have conflicted matter as its topic. Af ter all, once an autistic mode is triggered by activated complexes the subject in its grip may still think about and perceptually register a variety of unemotional matters, and some of this may obtain in a fully autistic rather than double book-keeping mode, perhaps providing the welcome distraction of an autistic lullaby. And perhaps, despite Effective motivation toward or away from reality forming a proper and foundational part of reality contact itself, we will find reason to withhold reference to motivation in particular cases of autism. What Bleuler’s encompassing concept of “autism” does entail, however, is: that delusional thought and experience develop consequent on the triggering of complexes; that enduring delusions will likely indirectly thematize the predicaments of the complex es; and that delusional thought and the underlying autism may be relinquished following the deactivation, strengthening of neurotic defenses against, and development of power fully motivating interests which do not provoke, the complexes.

Whilst there is now a large amount of published case material that can be modeled in this manner, we do not have empirical studies confirming or disconfirming the model itself. In a article in a handbook on phenomenological psychiatry it’s worth pausing at this point to ask what such an attempted confirmation ought to look like. For what’s not at all obvious is that we should follow what the empiricist psychologist might suggest—namely develop separate indices of schizophrenia, schizophrenic autism, complex activation, complex in tensity, drive activation, delusionality, etc. and see whether and how they correlate. For that to seem plausible we should need to suppose that the concept of “autism” after all works not to deepen our very understanding of what it means to be schizophrenic, nor of what it means for thought and experience to take delusional forms, but instead refer Fences a separable phenomenon which has these as its mere upshot. Yet such a conception was never set on the table for us by Bleuler, and has no place within a phenomenological ly-oriented psychiatry. The concept of autism is precisely that: a concept, not a judgment or hypothesis. It offers us an ontological vision, or a fundamental organizing understand ing, of schizophrenic life—and what would it even mean to try to evidence a vision?.

Schizophrenic Autism What a phenomenological approach can help achieve is the recovery of a conception of autism as an organizing gestalt, one that deepens our reflective understanding of what we already intuitively grasp when we meet with schizophrenic delusionality. Until now phenomenological approaches have typically ditched Bleuler’s positive markers of autism (the (iii) motivated retreat to (ii) a “wish-fulfilling” domain) to focus merely on his Mega Dive marker (the (i) loss of vital contact with reality). This article has suggested a phenom ecologically inspired re-theorization of the (ii) wishful element of autistic thought: not as a retreat to imagination but as a retreat to a psychological mode which no longer instant Utes a distinction between the imaginary and the real. It also suggested that the phenomenologist’s suspicions regarding (iii) the psychoanalytically inspired criterion, mo tivated either by prior non-phenomenological commitment to a neurobiological model, or by antipathy to (p. 824) versions of unconscious motivation misconstrued along the lines of conscious choice, could be mitigated by recovering the unity of matters biological and motivational in the concepts of the drive and the complex. It is then perhaps not by Begat ing, but by deepening, our reflective grasp of the character of such positive elements of Bleuler’s “autism” that phenomenological approaches can truly show their worth: by re Dealing the essential unity not only of the two faces (lost reality, and reality-fantasy indie tinction) of the autistic coin, but also of the delusional etchings on these faces, etchings revealing the shattering terror and devitalizing compromises of the schizophrenic predicament. PAGE_BREAK Scharfetter C.. “Ego‐Fragmentation in Schizophrenia: A Severe Dissociation of Self‐Experience.” In A. Moskowitz, I. Schäfer, and M. J. Dorthy (eating disorders.), Psychosis, Trauma and Dissociation: Emerging Perspectives on Severe Psychopathology, pp. 51–64. Chis ester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Schwartz M. A. and Wiggins O. P.. “Typification. The First Step for Clinical Dag noses in Psychiatry.” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 175: 65–77.

Sechehaye M.. A New Psychotherapy in Schizophrenia, trans. G. Rubin-Robson. New York: Rune & Stratton.

Legal H. (1977/1990). The Work of Hanna Legal: A Kleinian Approach to Clinical Practice. Northvale: Jason Bronson Inc.

Knelling, D.. Philosophy, Psychoanalysis, and the Origins of Meaning. Basingstoke: Ashgate.

Stanghellini G. and Ballerina M.. “Autism: Disembodied Existence.” Philosophy, Psy chiatry, and Psychology 11: 259–268.

Steiner J.. Psychic Retreats: Pathological Organizations in Psychotic, Neurotic and Borderline Patients. London: Rutledge.

Austin F.. Autistic Barriers in Neurotic Patients. London: Karnac.

Ungvari G. S., Xizang Y.-T., Hong Y., Lung H. C. M, and Chou, H. F. K.. “Diagnosis of Schizophrenia: Reliability of an Operationalized Approach to ‘Praecox-Feeling’.” Psy chopathology 43: 292–299.

Urfer A.. “Phenomenology and Psychopathology of Schizophrenia: The Views of Eugene Minkowski.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 8: 279–289.

Van Duppen Z.. “The Intersubjective Dimension of Schizophrenia.” Philosophy, Psy chiatry, & Psychology 24: 399–418.

Vargas S.. “Vulnerability to Psychosis, I-thou Intersubjectivity and the Praecox-Feel ing.” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 12: 131–143.

Schizophrenic Autism Von Domarus E.. “The Specific Laws of Logic in Schizophrenia.” In J. S. Kasanin (ed.), Language and Thought in Schizophrenia, pp. 104–114. Berkeley: University of Cali fornia Press.

Wittgenstein L.. On Certainty. Oxford: Blackwell.

Yeats W. B. (1886/2011). “The Stolen Child.” In M. L. Rosenthal (ed.), Selected Poems and Four Plays, pp. 2–4. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Notes:

1 ( ) See Bleuler; Bleuler; and Bleuler (1911/1950 ). Bleuler’s monograph was translated into English in 1950 and published as Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizo ophrenias. Kuhn provides a helpful overview.

2 ( ) Bleuler’s autism has to do with a qualitative alteration in the relation between the in ner life and the world. The autism of today’s autism spectrum disorder has instead to do with deficits in social relating and restrictions in patterns of interest (see DSM-5; DSM-third even offered schizo phrenia as an exclusionary criterion for an autism diagnosis).

3 ( ) The preoccupation with the handkerchief and bolster is curiously similar to the second case in lecture 17 of Freud’s (1916–17/1991 ) Introductory Lectures, which the patient herself traced back to a psychosexual and Oedipal preoccupation.

4 ( ) Our translation, with help from Anon Pipette.

Richard G.T. Gimps Dr Richard Gimps is a clinical psychologist in private psychotherapy practice in Ox ford, UK, and an associate of the Philosophy Faculty at the University of Oxford. He convenes the Philosophy Special Interest Group of the Institute of Psychoanalysis, the Oxford Interdisciplinary Seminars in Psychoanalysis, and the Making the Union scions Conscious seminar series. His research interests lie in psychoanalysis, psy chosis, existential phenomenology, and Wittgenstein.

Sanneke de Naan School of Humanities- Culture Studies, Tilburg University Dysphoria in Borderline Persons # Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Mario Ross Mons and Alessandra D’Agostino The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article on dysphoria as a psychopathological organizer in borderline patients exam Ines the borderline personality disorder (borderline personality disorder) from a contemporary psychopathological perspective, focusing on the dimension of lived experience rather than on the description of psychiatric symptoms. It presents dysphoria as a process which structures the border line patient’s experience in multiple, psychopathological pathways moving from basic lived experience to symptomatic disturbances (and vice versa), through here-and-now lived experience. It describes the psychopathological features characterizing the borderline personality disorder ba sic lived experience (background dysphoria and negative interpersonal disposition) as well as the temporary affect related to situational triggers saturating the borderline personality disorder here-andnow lived experience (situational dysphoria). It also discusses two specific pathways of situational dysphoria, one organizing and another disorganizing, each ending up in differ ent, acute phenomena. A final paragraph of this article is dedicated to the role of shame in borderline psychopathology.

Keywords: dysphoria, borderline personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, lived experience, background dysphoria, negative in terpersonal disposition, situational dysphoria, shame # Living on the Edge: The Borderline Instability BORDERLINE personality disorder (borderline personality disorder) is one of the most enigmatic disorders in the contemporary psychopathological scenario. On the one hand, it represents the most jag nosed condition in the area of personality disorders; it is also the main object of both the oretical and clinical reflection. On the other hand, it is far behind other major psychiatric disorders in awareness and research, due to its complexity and multiple possibilities of expression, but also due to the serious difficulties experienced by mental health probes signals in dealing with it. Particularly, one of the main problems of borderline personality disorder is that its clinical constellation is highly variegated, so that it might be better pictured as an area rather than a line. This area is very difficult to describe. Several au tors have tried to do that during the last fifty years (Zanarini 1993; Lineman 1993; Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Bradley et al. 2005; Lenzenweger et al. 2008). Among them, M. Schmideberg has proposed the most representative “portrait” of borderline personality disorder, describing it as being essentially stable in its instability.

First, instability affects the way in which borderline personality disorder has been theorized. Borderline personality disorder is primarily an entity suspended among other clinical entities: in general, be tween neurosis and psychosis. Besides, it is an entity suspended among syndrome, nos graphic category, and structural organization. Moreover, it is an entity suspended among symptoms, due to the wide range of possible combinations of disturbances legitimizing the borderline personality disorder diagnosis and making the borderline patient capable of moving among very dif ferment mental functioning levels so that sometimes he finds the resources to live his life in a less self-destructive manner.

Secondly, instability affects the borderline personality disorder identity component. The borderline patient is unable to develop a stable and consistent image of himself as a person and is dominated by an in ner sense of emptiness resulting in basic uncertainties that occur in all fields of life (the (p. 828) “syndrome of identity diffusion” described by Kornberg 1975). For this reason, the borderline identity has been defined as “liquid”, but not in the sense that it tends to adapt to the shape of a container, rather in the sense of a fluidity continua ously in search of a container. The container, however, invariably turns out to be disappointing, opening the way to the series of relational short circuits to which the borderline patient is dramatically accustomed.

Thirdly, instability affects the borderline personality disorder emotional level, which is rapidly changing and highly variable. The borderline patient is a very sensitive “barometer” reacting to minimal aria sons of the environmental pressure and being overwhelmed by a mixture of violent emo sons, such as depression tinged with irritation (dysphoria), anger, emptiness, boredom, excitement, and omnipotence. As these violent emotions appear, just as quickly they dis appear, thus leaving behind the rubble of the continuity of the self, as well as more or less disastrous effects in relationships.

Fourthly, instability affects the borderline personality disorder impulsivity area. The borderline impulsivity is in con Sinuous oscillation between the extroversion of the impulses (i.e. risky behaviors, teal longing behaviors, and sometimes really suicidal equivalents) and the introversion of the impulses (i.e. self-harming and suicidal behaviors). From this point of view, the borderline patient is torn between acting his impulsivity outward, thus exporting his interior drama in the reality, and acting it inward, thus making the wound a means for regulating intoner able emotions.

Finally, instability affects the borderline personality disorder relationship with reality. In the borderline psy chopathology—it is said—reality testing is preserved. This is true at a phenomenologicaldescriptive level. Indeed, the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for borderline personality Visor der refer to transient impairments of reality testing and the appearance of reversible paranoid breaks. Literature and clinical observations have highlighted how these psycho ic experiences emerging in borderline patients are not real psychotic experiences but in termediate experiences: quasi-psychotic experiences, quasi-delusions, quasi-hallucina Dysphoria in Borderline Persons sons. In sum, it is as if the borderline patient is neither able to be depressed (because his depression is described as “atypical”) nor delusional and halluci natory in a full sense. He is always on the edge, trapped in his “stable instability.”

For all these reasons, the borderline patient can be seen as a real migrant of psy chopathology ( Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2009 ), as there is no possibility of fixing him at a certain point of his pathway. So, what is it possible to say about him? In order to under stand what it feels like for a borderline to be a borderline, a shift is needed from the de Ascription of psychiatric symptoms to the dimension of lived experience.

Pathways of Dysphoria Over the past years, psychiatric literature has emphasized the fact that the infinite facets of the borderline psychopathology might be just the superficial manifestation—in the con text of relationships—of an unstable emotional core functioning as the true borderline personality disorder driving force. But what does emotional instability ex aptly mean? First of all, several terms are used in literature to describe the same or resat ed phenomena, including Effective instability, emotional dysregulation, mood swings, emotional (p. 829) impulsiveness, and Effective ability. According to a recent systematic review, emotional instability consists of “rapid oscillations of intense affect, with a difficulty in regulating these oscillations or their behavioral copse quinces” ( Marwaha et al. 2014: 1805).

In the specific context of borderline personality disorder, several authors have focused on the oscillation between dysphoria and anger—an oscillation that is particularly sensitive to interpersonal Kari bales (Goodman et al. 2009; Stanghellini and Rosfort 2013a, 2013b; Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014 ), thus making emotional instability in borderline personality disorder different from that (if present) in mood disorders, where it is less dependent on the context and more related to the polarities of depression/euphoria, euthymia/depression, and euthymia/euphoria.

To what extent does dysphoria differ from anxiety, depression, and anger? And, most im portantly, what is dysphoria? The word “dysphoria” derives from the ancient Greek dys photos, formed from dis-, “difficult,” and hero, “to bear,” meaning an oppressive and un bearable emotional condition. In psychiatric and clinical psychological literature, the term appears not only in the context of borderline personality disorder but even in that of mood or anxiety, being used as a synonym for sadness or subthreshold forms of depress ion and to describe a mixture of negative and unpleasant emotions lacking specificity. So, things are not clear and a deeper un derstanding of dysphoria is needed. In order to allow it and follow the line of research opened almost thirty years ago by the so-called Vienna school, it is essential to describe dysphoria as a “psychopathological organizer”, that is, a framework conferring a unitary meaningfulness to heterogeneous declination of pathological phenomena. In this sense, dysphoria can be seen as a process which structures the borderline personality disorder experience in multiple, psychopathological Dysphoria in Borderline Persons pathways moving from basic lived experience to symptomatic disturbances (and vice ver sa), through here-and-now lived experience.

A first pathway can be traced back to a “background dysphoria” dominating the basic lived experience of borderline personality disorder. This is an unpleasant, uncomfortable, negative, and oppressive condition, characterized by a mixture of tension, irritability, discontent, and unhappiness with all the features of mood: it is enduring, devoid of an intentional ob Sect, unmotivated, rigid, difficult to articulate, encompassing the whole horizon of the subject and affecting his relationship with the world, others, and himself (Ross Mons 2012; Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014). In other words, “it is the long-lasting and pro found emotional tonality... in which the borderline person is enmeshed” ( Stanghellini and Rosfort 2013b: 266). In this sense, it represents the persistent, tormenting expert Once of borderline personality disorder.

Background dysphoria, however, does not exist in vacuo. Rather, it has a relational na Cure. This means that the pathway of background dysphoria intersects with another fac tor characterizing borderline personality disorder functioning: a “negative interpersonal disposition.” This is a sort of vulnerability to interpersonal dysfunction constituted by three subdimensions: a) hos tile distrust, that is, the cognitive component of hostility consisting of negative beliefs of others seen as treating antagonists; b) interpersonal sensitivity, that is, a relational reactivity combining abandonment fears, rejection sensitivity, and intolerance of aloneness; c) impaired empathy, that is, a difficulty in the multidimensional (including both cognitive and Effective components) capacity to apprehend another person’s state of mind.

(p. 830) In particular context-dependent circumstances, background dysphoria and Mega Dive interpersonal disposition compact together into a second pathway ending up in a spe civic condition: “situational dysphoria,” which pervades the here-and-now lived expert Once of borderline personality disorder. This is a contingent state of pressure, urge (to act), and quasi-explosion, which is very dependent on the environmental, relational, and interpersonal context. It is a kind of impatience and intolerance developing into a drive to violent action (not Feces charily in the sense of physical violence, but rather of a great intensity of the emotions in Solved). It is like feeling “on the edge,” together with a tendency to anxiety, apprehend ion, and intensification of reactivity and vigilance in a state of dysphoric alertness. In this sense, it represents the cyclic, temporary experience of borderline personality disorder.

Taken together, background dysphoria, negative interpersonal disposition, and situational dysphoria constitute, so to speak, the “interpersonal-Effective specialty” of borderline personality disorder. The Kari ety of symptomatic disturbances can be located in this perspective as the external side of this interpersonal-Effective specialty or, said another way, as the end of all the pathways of dysphoria. At this point, situational dysphoria plays a key role. Loaded with back ground dysphoria and negative interpersonal disposition, and solicited by contingent stressful events, situational dysphoria needs an escape route. This is found by following two other pathways: one disorganizing and another organizing, each ending up in differ Dysphoria in Borderline Persons ent, acute phenomena. A single paragraph will be dedicated to the description of each of these pathways.

Emptiness or the Dissolved Self The first pathway (disorganizing) of situational dysphoria ends up in a state of disorgani Cation and confusion with respect to personal identity. Tension, irritability, and urge (to act) cannot break down the dysphoric mood in order to orient it toward a specific object. Rather, dysphoria shows all its “centrifugal” drive, dispersing the various aspects of the self instead of aggregating them in some form of recognizable identity. As a result, the vagueness of the self contributes to the vagueness of the other, and vice versa.

Such a state of disorganization affects not only the patient, but also the clinician in the therapeutic relationship, who might be forced to try to “organize” the dysphoric pathway. This organizational attempt often results in acts that are symmetrical to those of the pa taint, just leading to the breakdown of the relationship. However, these oscillations of one’s own sense of identity occurring during the sessions can be also seen as a sort of clinical organ of perception useful to understand what is happening in the therapeutic re lationship in that moment.

Besides, on a more intimate level of the self, the identity diffusion corresponds to a series of painful experiences of emptiness, insubstantiality, and inau thenticity—the lived side of identity diffusion. But what is “empty Bess”? A patient calls it the “syndrome of the empty mirror”, meaning that, when he tries to imagine a mental image of himself, he sees just a black hole that makes the reality of his physical existence questionable. However, this emptiness is not a synonym of loss or lack of something. In fact, while in the experience of lack the person suffers from the disappearance of the object, in the experience of emptiness the person suffers from a (p. 831) painful incoherence, that is, a subjective sense of lack of coherence.

Moreover, emptiness has many ways of manifesting itself. First of all, emptiness can man fest itself through the feeling of being inhabited by something dead, which leads the per son to live a sense of hopeless desolation. This emptiness is different from the previous one because the person identifies aspects of himself as dead or lifeless (i.e. the expert Once of the “alien self,” as described by Fonagy et al. 2002), and those make him close to finding an intentional object with which to converse. Secondly, emptiness can manifest it self as a result of a worn-out relationship, when exhausting proximity blurs each other’s boundaries. In this sense, the experience of emptiness makes thought disappear and the feeling of the self dissolving.

Finally, emptiness can manifest itself in a more dramatic way when it characterizes not only the patient’s inner world but even his outside world. In this case, the risk of suicide is particularly high, because of the disconnection of dysphoric irritability from the world. More frequently, however, the disorganizing dysphoria-emptiness pathway can divert to Dysphoria in Borderline Persons impulsive actions. When the experience of emptiness is equivalent to the experience of painful incoherence, impulsive actions give greater cohesion and coherence to the self, restoring a sense of vitality (a “desperate vitality,” as described by Stanghellini and Ros fort 2013a) and regaining hope. Instead, when the experience of emptiness corresponds to the experience of excessive proximity, impulsive actions strongly re-establish the bor Hers of the self.

Anger and the Organization of Pain The second pathway (organizing) of situational dysphoria ends up in anger. In its Latin and Greek roots ( Bangor, nacho ), anger refers to strangling, meaning an emotion normally conceived as involving a personal offense or somehow having been wronged by another person. In this sense, anger has several functions: a) to cancel a source of irritation or pain; b) to remove an obstacle to gratification; c) to re store a sense of autonomy in the face of very frustrating situations. In the first two cases, anger identifies an object as “source” of pain or “obstacle” to gratification. In the third case, instead, anger has an effect on the self.

In light of this premise and in order to better describe the role of anger in borderline personality disorder, it is im portent to introduce a phenomenological distinction between affects and moods. While af Sects are responses to a phenomenon perceived as their motivation and typically involve an explicit intentional object that directs and informs the affect itself, moods are normally not directed or informed by any particular object but rather introduce an ambiguous and highly frustrating emotional vacuum. Anger and dyspho ria can be inserted into this dialectic. In fact, if anger can be considered as an affect, dys phobia can be described as a mood. What does it mean? We will try to explain it now, fo using on four main areas: object, hope, self, and authenticity (Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014 ).

First of all, anger is the means through which the borderline patient reacts to every mini mal breaking in empathy: anger emerges when the patient feels that the other will not as Fume the function he desperately needs. In fact, anger makes the object clearly visible, (p. 832) strongly characterized, and stand out very distinctively. It allows the borderline personality disorder patient to switch from the state of vagueness typical of dysphoric mood (where the object is blurred, nebulous, and ambiguous) to a condition in which the object is crisp and clear. In this sense, anger has a “centripetal” role, coagulating the emotional dispersion by identi Dying each time an object/interlocutor ( Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014 ).

Secondly, the expression of anger implies the existence of hope. This means that anger makes the patient believe that the object, the environment, or reality itself will react to the violence of the stimulus, thus assuming the role it had never played or had lost. Anger, in fact, is different from resignation; it is a desperate vital reaction that presuppose es the possibility of a response by an interlocutor. At the same time, anger defends from Dysphoria in Borderline Persons the pain of separation and loss: a mind kept busy by angry fantasies somehow is still clinging to what it has lost ( Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014 ).

Thirdly, anger gives consistency to the self. As anger mounts, the object becomes the real reason for pain, thus allowing the person to assume a clear and consistent accusatory role toward it. This gives him the possibility of perceiving his own self as cohesive and powerful. In other words, anger unravels the fog organizing an undefined and therefore intolerable psychic pain: in this state, the patient believes he sees things clearly and knows why he is suffering.

Lastly, anger tests the authenticity of the object. Borderline anger brings the object out of the shadow, opens it like a can opener, and forcibly extracts its true nature (Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2014). This is a sort of load test helpful for evaluating how the object re acts to pressure and stress. The objective is to verify the soundness of the other, but also to discover its true features, as if only by seeing people bleeding in a traumatic situation the borderline patient could see how they really are.

The Body as a Blowhole Alongside anger, the second pathway of situational dysphoria can also organize itself into a concrete self-oriented behavior, ending up in non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI) (i.e. the act of deliberately producing bodily injury, such as cutting or burning). Research shows that 70–75% of borderline patients enact self-injurious behaviors. The most common form of NSSI is cutting (80%), but brews ing (24%), burning (20%), head banging (15%), and biting (7%) also seem to be frequent. So, NSSI could be defined as a real “behavioral specialty of the patient with borderline personality disorder”. Why? And what relationship do these behaviors have with dysphoria?

Undoubtedly, NSSI has the “advantage” of positioning negative emotions in a behavioral circuit that leads to a state of lowered tension. It is a momentary oasis of peace, a sort of discharge to the ground. In other words, cutting the flesh represents an attempt to mod late or staunch a negative and oppressive mood condition, precipitating it in a place that has a name and is objectifiable, delimited, and so also “curable.” It is as if the body (in its surface) could be a concrete and visible blowhole from which to let compressed and over whelming emotions spill out. Which emotions? What must be evacuated? We have tried to clarify this point, proposing six “meaning-organizers” (Ross Mons and D’Agostino 2009 ) as (p. 833) synthesizing schemes of comprehension connecting different pathological ex periences into unitary cores of meaningfulness.

Concertizing

The wounds function as a means to transform a mental pain into a physical one, to con tool intolerable feelings through the body. It might be an attempt to give shape to an in visible, wandering, and boundless mental pain by localizing it in the body, or to fill a dis Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Dressing inner emptiness with a bodily sensation. At the moment of cutting, time stops and everything is concretely focused on the physical pain (always lower than the psycho logical pain) and on bleeding.

Punishing–Eradicating–Purifying

The wounds function as a means to punish/eradicate some inner “evil” in order to detox fy/purify oneself. It is a way to punish a bad self, to assail one’s thoughts, feelings, and memories, or even to unconsciously repeat an emotional sequence connected to a history of childhood abuse: repetition here replaces recollection, functioning as a shield against bad memories. This way, cutting the skin creates an open window through which the in ner tension can be released, and all the bad and the alien can wriggle out from the inter or of the body.

Regulating Dysphoria The wounds function as a tool to modulate the dysphoric mood typical of the borderline existence. NSSI becomes a way to get at least temporary relief from distressing tension, to transform chaos into calm, and to control the mixture of negative emotions made by tension, irritability, discontent, and confusion, which is the chronic, painful background to the borderline experience. Besides, self-injury can also be helpful in interrupting the de personalization/derealization cycle, searching for lively and stimulating experiences in physical pain to feel not empty or dead but alive.

Communicating Without Words The wounds function as a language to convey something inexpressible through words, but also as a way to control others’ behavior and emotions by eliciting caregiving responses from them. Just to be precise, this is not a form of manipulation since this term means a mode of thought and behavior requiring complex and sophisticated mental functions which in most borderline personality disorder cases is gravely compromised. Rather, in border line psychopathology there is mostly an inability to freely treat the other as an au tonomous and independent object and the necessity instead to treat him or her as a “sub jective object”.

(p. 834) Building a Memory of Oneself The wounds function as a way to secure a memory of oneself. The skin is a surface on which to carve and mark certain circumstances, events, and emotions that correspond to significant turning points. A patient calls his self-inflicted wounds “my notches.” In this sense, self-cutting becomes a way to make sure that certain events have left a concrete and visible trace—a trace one can immediately locate on one’s skin. Another patient speaks of her wounds as a way to mark on her skin the evil she felt inside.

Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Turning Active The wounds function as a way to transform passively endured or externally imposed exp riences into active ones. This way, an intrinsically traumatic sense of helplessness is transformed into a more reassuringly self-inflicted “trauma.” However, self-cutting is also an attempt to shed skin instead of changing oneself. There is also a social dimension to the “wounds”: they can take on the characteristics of a ritual through which one’s need to feel in control of one’s body is acted out. The wounds, in this sense, be come brands to exhibit as truly distinguishing features.

These six meaning-organizers may interweave themselves, representing from time to time the core organizer of the behavior, meaning that self-injuring causes a temporary relief from negative symptoms (i.e. anxiety, depersonalization, or desperation) but also refers to experiences of salvation, healing, and protection of one’s own structure. Far from being a Reconstructive passage to the act, it assumes the valence of a self-con structive “act of passage,” that is, a mean for crossing and conjuring the flood of suffer ing.

What about Shame?

Summarizing the main concepts expressed so far, dysphoria appears to be a predominant feature in borderline personality disorder, saturating the emotional scenario with its multiple pathways. This is true, but it is not all. The emotional storm that the borderline patient experiences tends to overshadow other emotions that are often difficult to catch but still relevant in the “econ omy” of his lived experience. This is the case with shame. Despite clinical evidence, in fact, the role of shame in borderline psychopathology has always been poorly studied. This is strange because shame is a central feature in most borderline personality disorder experiences: traumatic childhood events, anger, and acting-outs, above all. Besides, shame is a sensitive marker in borderline personality disorder of all those moments in which the relational distance is reduced and the shadow of the other (and the dependence on him) appears; in those moments the patient expert Fences a painful unveiling of his powerlessness. So, shame seems to be a core emotion of the borderline psychopathology.

More specifically, the position that shame has in borderline personality disorder can be described at three levels: a) shame as a part of the core generating the borderline psychopathology; b) the relation ship (p. 835) between shame and anger; c) shame as a developmental progression marker. Regarding the first level, shame must be considered in strict relationship with trauma/abuse. In fact, although the traumatic vulnerability factors cannot be thought as a direct cause of borderline personality disorder, there is no doubt that early traumatic expert Fences amplify the risk for developing psychopathology (in general) and the risk for Bevel oping borderline psychopathology (in particular). In this complex core generating borderline personality disorder, shame has a central position, belonging to the area of traumatic emotions. The disorga Sizing function of the traumatic events exposes the powerlessness of the subject, giving rise to shame, which is responsible, in turn, for a further disorganizing process.

Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Regarding the second level, shame must be considered in a sort of recursive relationship with anger. The oscillation between “humiliating shame” and “implacable anger” or “nar cissistic anger” theorized by Kohut (1971 ) resumes, in a more dynamic way, the oscilla son between “sthenic” and “asthenic” dispositions in paranoid syndromes, described by Kretschmer (1918 ). Kretschmer arrived at the conclusion that even in the area of para nova, which is most typically made up of combative and fanatical personalities, one can trace an “asthenic thorn,” a vulnerable point, a “hidden focus of very old feelings of insuf ficiency”. So, a “shame–anger spiral” takes place from the intolerance of this shameful feeling of insufficiency, which is therefore transformed into an angry feeling against the others seen as persecutors because they are witnesses and responsible for the powerlessness of the patient. Similarly, an opposite anger–shame spiral can take place. In this second case, however, shame is considered as a by-product (together with anxiety and guilt) of the conflict between intense destructive/ aggressive impulses and relative powerlessness of the Ego structures in dealing with them.

Regarding the third and final level, shame must be considered as having different dime ions or as a “stack” with both disorganizing and organizing areas: if the di Pension of shame-ignominy belongs to the first area, the dimension of shame-modesty be longs to the second area. In the latter meaning, the emergence of shame reveals a differ entiation process, in which something new—shameful—starts coming up to the surface. During a psychotherapeutic treatment, for example, the moment of the shame may coin Aide with the discovery of one’s real dependence on others, with the unveiling of one’s most fragile and vulnerable aspects which can no longer be hidden behind the crust of the background dysphoria or the barrage of angry impulsive breaks.

The ability to recognize this moment as a first developmental step, together with the abili ty to tolerate the burden of shame, in the personality structure of the patient and in the therapeutic relation, opens to a further evolution in the therapeutic process, which, ac cording to Adler, corresponds to a transition from borderline to narcissistic level of functioning, seen as along a continuum. As Bromberg states (2001 ), in fact, the theta pectic relation must be able to gradually sustain the patient in his attempts to experience his structure as stable and strong enough to resist the intervention from the subjectivity of the other without this threat to overwhelm his sense of self unleashing a wave of shame and fear associated with the irreparable trauma of early life.

In conclusion, our clinical experience suggested to us the need to reconsider borderline personality disorder as having an essential interpersonal-Effective psychopathological core. In this sense, we proposed dysphoria as the marker of different levels of the border line subjective experience, thus organizing both its basic lived experience (together with a negative interpersonal disposition) and its here-and-now lived experience. Working on dysphoria at (p. 836) these levels from a therapeutic point of view could be helpful in pre venting the development of symptomatic disturbances.

Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Bibliography Acquarini E.. “Identityà liquid nel Borderline. Una ricerca condotta con l’Identity Disturbance Questionnaire (IDQ).” Psichiatria di Comunità 1: 48–56. Adler G.. “The Borderline-Narcissistic Personality Disorder Continuum.” American Journal of Psychiatry 138: 46–50. Ballerina A. and Ross Mons M.. “Shame and Delusion.” Comprendre 5: 13–26. Barefoot J. C.. “Developments in the Measurement of Hostility.” In H.S. Friedman (ed.), Hostility, Coping & Health, pp. 13–31. Washington: American Psychological Associa son. Lerner P., et al.. “Psychopathological Concepts of Dysphoria.” Psychopathology 20: 93–100. Bradley R., et al.. “The Borderline Personality Diagnosis in Adolescents: Gender Differences and Subtypes.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 46: 1006–1019. Bromberg P. M.. Standing in the Spaces: Essays on Clinical Process, Trauma, and Dissociation. Hillsdale: The Analytic Press. Brooke M. R., et al.. “Mood Instability: Significance, Definition and Measure Bent.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 207: 283–285. Bella M., et al.. “The Relationship Between Dysphoria and Proneness to Hallucina son and Delusions Among Young Adults.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 49: 544–550. Clarkin J. F., et al.. “Prototypic Typology and the Borderline Personality Disorder.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 92: 263–275. Clarkin J. F., et al.. “Factor Structure of Borderline Personality Disorder Criteria.” Journal of Personality Disorders 7: 137–143. Cole P. M., et al.. “Emotional Instability, Poor Emotional Awareness, and the Bevel opment of Borderline Personality.” Development and Psychopathology 21: 1293–1310. Davis M. H.. “Measuring Individual Differences in Empathy: Evidence for a Multi dimensional Approach.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 44: 113–126. Favazza A.. Bodies Under Siege. Self-mutilation and Body Modification in Culture and Psychiatry. Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press. Fonagy P., et al.. Affect Regulation, Mentalization and the Development of the Self. London: Other Press. Gabriel E.. “Dysphoric Mood in Paranoid Psychoses.” Psychopathology 20: 101– 106.

Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Bibliography Acquarini E.. “Identityà liquid nel Borderline. Una ricerca condotta con l’Identity Disturbance Questionnaire (IDQ).” Psichiatria di Comunità 1: 48–56. Adler G.. “The Borderline-Narcissistic Personality Disorder Continuum.” American Journal of Psychiatry 138: 46–50. Ballerina A. and Ross Mons M.. “Shame and Delusion.” Comprendre 5: 13–26. Barefoot J. C.. “Developments in the Measurement of Hostility.” In H.S. Friedman (ed.), Hostility, Coping & Health, pp. 13–31. Washington: American Psychological Associa son. Lerner P., et al.. “Psychopathological Concepts of Dysphoria.” Psychopathology 20: 93–100. Bradley R., et al.. “The Borderline Personality Diagnosis in Adolescents: Gender Differences and Subtypes.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 46: 1006–1019. Bromberg P. M.. Standing in the Spaces: Essays on Clinical Process, Trauma, and Dissociation. Hillsdale: The Analytic Press. Brooke M. R., et al.. “Mood Instability: Significance, Definition and Measure Bent.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 207: 283–285. Bella M., et al.. “The Relationship Between Dysphoria and Proneness to Hallucina son and Delusions Among Young Adults.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 49: 544–550. Clarkin J. F., et al.. “Prototypic Typology and the Borderline Personality Disorder.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 92: 263–275. Clarkin J. F., et al.. “Factor Structure of Borderline Personality Disorder Criteria.” Journal of Personality Disorders 7: 137–143. Cole P. M., et al.. “Emotional Instability, Poor Emotional Awareness, and the Bevel opment of Borderline Personality.” Development and Psychopathology 21: 1293–1310. Davis M. H.. “Measuring Individual Differences in Empathy: Evidence for a Multi dimensional Approach.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 44: 113–126. Favazza A.. Bodies Under Siege. Self-mutilation and Body Modification in Culture and Psychiatry. Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press. Fonagy P., et al.. Affect Regulation, Mentalization and the Development of the Self. London: Other Press. Gabriel E.. “Dysphoric Mood in Paranoid Psychoses.” Psychopathology 20: 101– 106.

Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Glenn C. R. and Klonsky E. D.. “Emotion Dysregulation as a Core Feature of Bor decline Personality Disorder.” Journal of Personality Disorders 23: 20–28. Goodman M., et al.. “Quieting the Effective Storm of Borderline Personality Visor der.” American Journal of Psychiatry 166: 522–528. Gunderson J. G.. Borderline Personality Disorder. Washington: American Psych attic Press. Gunderson J. G. and Ridolfi E.. “Borderline Personality Disorder. Suicidality and Self-mutilation.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 932: 61–73. Gunderson J. G. and Lyons-Ruth K.. “borderline personality disorder’s Interpersonal Hypersensitivity Phenol type: A Gene-Environment-Developmental Model.” Journal of Personality Disorders 22: 22–41.

(p. 837) Henry C., et al.. “Effective Instability and Impulsivity in Borderline Person laity and Bipolar second Disorders: Similarities and Differences.” Journal of Psychiatric Re search 35: 307–312. Kornberg O.. Aggression in Personality Disorders and Perversion. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. Kornberg O.. “Aggression, Trauma and Hatred in the Treatment of Borderline Pa taints.” Psychiatric Clinics of North America 17: 701–714. Kornberg O. F.. Borderline Conditions and Pathological Narcissism. New York: Bronson. Kerr P. L., et al.. “Nonsuicidal Self-Injury: A Review of Current Research for Family Medicine and Primary Care Physicians.” Journal of the American Board of Family Jedi cine. 23: 240–259. Kohut H.. The Analysis of the Self. New York: International Universities Press. Kretschmer E.. Der sensitive Beziehungswahn. Berlin: Stringer. Le Breton D.. La Beau et la trace. Surlesblessures de soi. Paris: Métailié. Le Breton D.. En souffrance. Adolescence et entree ans la vie. Paris: Métailié. Lemma A.. Under the Skin. A Psychoanalytic Study of Body Modification. London: Rutledge. Lenzenweger M., et al.. “Refining the Borderline Personality Disorder Phenotype through Finite Mixture Modeling: Implications for Classification.” Journal of Personality Disorders 22: 313–331.

Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Glenn C. R. and Klonsky E. D.. “Emotion Dysregulation as a Core Feature of Bor decline Personality Disorder.” Journal of Personality Disorders 23: 20–28. Goodman M., et al.. “Quieting the Effective Storm of Borderline Personality Visor der.” American Journal of Psychiatry 166: 522–528. Gunderson J. G.. Borderline Personality Disorder. Washington: American Psych attic Press. Gunderson J. G. and Ridolfi E.. “Borderline Personality Disorder. Suicidality and Self-mutilation.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 932: 61–73. Gunderson J. G. and Lyons-Ruth K.. “borderline personality disorder’s Interpersonal Hypersensitivity Phenol type: A Gene-Environment-Developmental Model.” Journal of Personality Disorders 22: 22–41.

(p. 837) Henry C., et al.. “Effective Instability and Impulsivity in Borderline Person laity and Bipolar second Disorders: Similarities and Differences.” Journal of Psychiatric Re search 35: 307–312. Kornberg O.. Aggression in Personality Disorders and Perversion. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. Kornberg O.. “Aggression, Trauma and Hatred in the Treatment of Borderline Pa taints.” Psychiatric Clinics of North America 17: 701–714. Kornberg O. F.. Borderline Conditions and Pathological Narcissism. New York: Bronson. Kerr P. L., et al.. “Nonsuicidal Self-Injury: A Review of Current Research for Family Medicine and Primary Care Physicians.” Journal of the American Board of Family Jedi cine. 23: 240–259. Kohut H.. The Analysis of the Self. New York: International Universities Press. Kretschmer E.. Der sensitive Beziehungswahn. Berlin: Stringer. Le Breton D.. La Beau et la trace. Surlesblessures de soi. Paris: Métailié. Le Breton D.. En souffrance. Adolescence et entree ans la vie. Paris: Métailié. Lemma A.. Under the Skin. A Psychoanalytic Study of Body Modification. London: Rutledge. Lenzenweger M., et al.. “Refining the Borderline Personality Disorder Phenotype through Finite Mixture Modeling: Implications for Classification.” Journal of Personality Disorders 22: 313–331.

Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Lineman M.. Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford Press.

Loll F.. L’epoch dell’inconscio. Milan, IT: Mimesis.

Marwaha S., et al.. “How is Effective Instability Defined and Measured? A System tic Review.” Psychological Medicine 44: 1793–1808.

Mares R., et al.. “Is Self-disturbance the Core of Borderline Personality Disorder? An Outcome Study of Borderline Personality Factors.” Australian and New Zealand Our nal of Psychiatry 45: 214–222.

Pestalozzi J.. “The Symbolic and Concrete: Psychotic Adolescents in Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy.” International Journal of Psychoanalysis 84: 733–753.

Rosfort R. and Stanghellini G.. “The Feeling of Being a Person.” Philosophy, Psych try, and Psychology 16: 283–288.

Ross Mons M.. “Borderline: il drama Bella disforia.” In M. Ross Mons, Psicopa tologia del presence. Crisp Bella nosografia e nuove fore Bella clinic, pp. 15–63. Milan, IT: FrancoAngeli.

Ross Mons M.. “The Window and the Wound: Dysphoria and Anger in Borderline Disorders.” In G. Stanghellini and M. Aragon (eating disorders.), An Experiential Approach to Psy chopathology. Phenomenology of Psychotic Experiences, pp. 61–77. Ham, ZG: Stringer.

Ross Mons M. and Stanghellini G.. “Psychopathology: An Edgeless Razor?” Com prehensile Psychiatry 37: 196–204.

Ross Mons M. and Princigalli fifth.. “Psicopatologia borderline: il pesto Bella ver gonna.” Psichiatria di Comunità 8: 129–141.

Ross Mons M. and D’Agostino A.. L’autolesionismo. Coma, IT: Carocci.

Ross Mons M. and D’Agostino A.. “borderline personality disorder from a Psychopathological-Dynamic Per spective.” Journal of Psychopathology 20: 451–460.

Ruggiero I.. “The Unreachable Object? Difficulties and Paradoxes in the Analytical Relationship with Borderline Patients.” International Journal of Psychoanalysis 93: 585– 606.

(p. 838) Scheff T. J.. “The Shame–Rage Spiral: A Case Study of an Interminable Quarrel.” In H. Block Lewis (ed.), The Role of Shame in Symptom Formation, pp. 109– 149. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Schmideberg M.. “The Borderline Patient.” In S. Aries (ed.), American Handbook of Psychiatry, pp. 398–416. New York: Basic Books.

Searles H.. My Work with Borderline Patients. New York: Bronson.

Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Stanghellini G.. Psicopatologia del sens commune. Milan, IT: Raffaello Corina. Stanghellini G.. “De-Stigmatizing Manipulation: An Exercise in Second-Order Em pathic Understanding.” South African Journal of Psychiatry 20: 11–14. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R. (2013a). “Borderline Depression: A Desperate Vitality.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 20: 153–177. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R. (2013b). “Borderland.” In Emotion and Personhood. Explore ing Fragility—Making Sense of Vulnerability, pp. 261–295. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Starcevic fifth.. “Dysphoric about Dysphoria: Towards a Greater Conceptual Clarity of the Term.” Australasian Psychiatry 15: 9–13. Stone M. H.. “Treatment of Borderline Patients: A Pragmatic Approach.” Psych attic Clinics of North America 13: 265–285. Voruganti L. and Wad A. G.. “Neurolepetic Dysphoria: Towards a New Synthesis.” Psychopharmacology 171: 121–132. Wilkinson-Ryan T. and Weston D.. “Identity Disturbance in Borderline Personality Disorder: An Empirical Investigation.” American Journal of Psychiatry 157: 528–541. Winnicott D. W.. “The Use of an Object and Relating through Identifications.” In D. W. Winnicott, Playing and Reality, pp. 115–127. London: Tavistock. Zanarini M. C.. “borderline personality disorder as an Impulse Spectrum Disorder.” In J. Paris (ed.), Border line Personality Disorder: Etiology and Treatment, pp. 67–85. Washington: American Psy chiatric Press. Zanarini M. C., et al.. “Discriminating Borderline Personality Disorder from Other Axis second Disorders.” American Journal of Psychiatry 127: 161–167. Zanarini M. C., et al.. “The Ten-Year Course of Physically Self-Destructive Acts Re ported by Borderline Patients and Axis second Comparison Subjects.” Alta Psychiatric Scandi navica 117. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2008.01155.x Zilkha N.. “Monte.” Adolescence 439: 245–256. Zisook S., et al.. “Reported Suicidal Behavior and Current Suicidal Ideation in a Psychiatric Outpatient Clinic.” Annals of Clinical Psychiatry 6: 27–31.

Mario Ross Mons Department of Humanistic Studies, University of Urbino Alessandra D’Agostino Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Stanghellini G.. Psicopatologia del sens commune. Milan, IT: Raffaello Corina. Stanghellini G.. “De-Stigmatizing Manipulation: An Exercise in Second-Order Em pathic Understanding.” South African Journal of Psychiatry 20: 11–14. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R. (2013a). “Borderline Depression: A Desperate Vitality.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 20: 153–177. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R. (2013b). “Borderland.” In Emotion and Personhood. Explore ing Fragility—Making Sense of Vulnerability, pp. 261–295. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Starcevic fifth.. “Dysphoric about Dysphoria: Towards a Greater Conceptual Clarity of the Term.” Australasian Psychiatry 15: 9–13. Stone M. H.. “Treatment of Borderline Patients: A Pragmatic Approach.” Psych attic Clinics of North America 13: 265–285. Voruganti L. and Wad A. G.. “Neurolepetic Dysphoria: Towards a New Synthesis.” Psychopharmacology 171: 121–132. Wilkinson-Ryan T. and Weston D.. “Identity Disturbance in Borderline Personality Disorder: An Empirical Investigation.” American Journal of Psychiatry 157: 528–541. Winnicott D. W.. “The Use of an Object and Relating through Identifications.” In D. W. Winnicott, Playing and Reality, pp. 115–127. London: Tavistock. Zanarini M. C.. “borderline personality disorder as an Impulse Spectrum Disorder.” In J. Paris (ed.), Border line Personality Disorder: Etiology and Treatment, pp. 67–85. Washington: American Psy chiatric Press. Zanarini M. C., et al.. “Discriminating Borderline Personality Disorder from Other Axis second Disorders.” American Journal of Psychiatry 127: 161–167. Zanarini M. C., et al.. “The Ten-Year Course of Physically Self-Destructive Acts Re ported by Borderline Patients and Axis second Comparison Subjects.” Alta Psychiatric Scandi navica 117. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2008.01155.x Zilkha N.. “Monte.” Adolescence 439: 245–256. Zisook S., et al.. “Reported Suicidal Behavior and Current Suicidal Ideation in a Psychiatric Outpatient Clinic.” Annals of Clinical Psychiatry 6: 27–31.

Mario Ross Mons Department of Humanistic Studies, University of Urbino Alessandra D’Agostino Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Department of Humanistic Studies, University of Urbino Dysphoria in Borderline Persons Department of Humanistic Studies, University of Urbino Psychosis High-Risk States Psychosis High-Risk States Lu's Madeira, Ilaria Bonoldi, and Barnaby Nelson The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Oct 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Psychosis High-Risk states are today a major field of research in psychiatry allowing early intervention (including primary prevention) of severe psychotic disorders. Psychosis High-Risk criteria select different clinical features and appear to be different center-wise and country-wise. As several of the phenomena accounting for symptoms are subjective in nature, both original and recent inputs from research in phenomenological psychopathol ogy are great candidates for adding to the conceptual validity of High-Risk states. These subjects show a disturbed grip on reality–perplexity, derealization, and depersonalization —as well as a diminished presence in the world and involuntarily ruminating on things they previously ignored. Special sets of phenomena are presented including Truman symptoms, anomalous subjective self and world experiences, and abnormal bodily phe novena. Contemporary predictive and transnational research will ultimately integrate phenomenological data with the neurocognitive and neurobiological models of mental dis orders.

Keywords: High-Risk, phenomenology, psychopathology, Truman, self # Introduction PSYCHOTIC episodes are archetypes of severe psychiatric syndromes and of a profound disruption of psychosocial development with great personal strain and social and economy cal burden. More significantly, they can mark the beginning of severe psychiatric conj sons such as schizophrenia and bipolar and depressive disorders. Despite numerous ad Dances in treatment of these disorders, morbidity and mortality and overall burden are one of the greatest found in clinical medicine (Murray 1996; Rössler et al. 2005). The rise of clinical “High-Risk states” pinpoints such measurable risk and has allowed primary prevention (along with early detection and intervention) before the onset of a mature syn dome. This is a novel approach to severe mental disorders which attempts to change their natural history. Research has shown that only a “uniquely evidence-informed, evi Fence-building and cost-effective reform provides a blueprint and launch pad to radically Psychosis High-Risk States change the wider landscape of mental health care and dissolve many of the barriers that have constrained progress for so long” ( McGorry 2015: 310). This development has al lowed nosological and phenomenological Inquires in clinical High-Risk states, highlight ing a range of categories and phenomena these patients go through and allowing the trial of assorted potential preventive interventions.

There are various seminal inputs for “early symptoms” of mental disorders such as Griesinger and Kraepelin and, particularly for schizo phrenia, in Burke (1936 ). However, before reporting on the range of “early” symptoms in clinical High-Risk states, some conceptual clarifications are necessary since the terms “initial/early,” “precursor,” “prodromal,” and “basic” symptoms cannot be used inter changeably. The concept of early symptoms is credited to Bleuler portraying the sump toms of early schizophrenia. They characterize predelusional states as in Eluding unspecific and seldom recognizable Effective symptoms, such as indifference and apathy, obsessive and compulsive ideation and “hysteric and neurasthenic” fluctuant symptoms. The (p. 840) concept of “prodromal” symptoms is attributed to May er-Gross and these include change in activity, psychasthenic complaints and the lack of Effective resonance, depersonalization phenomena, compulsive symptoms without anti ety, hypochondriac symptoms, compulsive symptoms, and whirlwind thought processes (manic tonality). Further analysis of the early stages of schizophrenia by Huber and Gross allowed for the use of the terms “precursor” and “prodromal” sump toms. The “precursor” symptoms represented symptoms that precede (months) the prodromal phase and psychosis and are of limited duration—hours/days (rarely months/years)—completely remitting before psychosis. The term “prodromal” symptoms considered those that pre ceding psychosis would not remit on during the state and that would show a fluctuating course. The concept of basic symptoms was laid by Huber to de scribe the subjective experiences lived and depicted by patients in the initial phases of schizophrenia and in post-psychotic states. These included fluctuating cognitive, motive tonal (fatigability, reduction of energy and resistance, reduction in activity, indecision/ ambivalence), and emotional experiences and the reduction in coping capacity (to changes), the will to be with others and patience (experience of irritability and disco fort). They also included perceptual disturbances ranging from sight, noise, taste and smell, or cenesthetic experiences. These symptoms were not specific to schizophrenia, but present in organic brain syndromes and in melancholic depression too. These studies considered symptoms defined retrospectively (after the diagnosis of psychosis), an ap roach that was later abandoned to in Cavour of the use of these terms in prospective analysis. However, a subset of these symptoms—taken as “basic” symptoms—were found to be predictive of subsequent development of psychosis, particularly schizophrenia. These include nine cognitive disturbances (Cognitive Disturbances scale: COGDIS), such as subjective disturbances of thought process (interference, blockages, pressure), as well as inability to divide attention, disturbances of expressive and receptive speech, unstable ideas of reference, and captivation of attention by details of visual field. change the wider landscape of mental health care and dissolve many of the barriers that have constrained progress for so long” ( McGorry 2015: 310). This development has al lowed nosological and phenomenological Inquires in clinical High-Risk states, highlight ing a range of categories and phenomena these patients go through and allowing the trial of assorted potential preventive interventions.

There are various seminal inputs for “early symptoms” of mental disorders such as Griesinger and Kraepelin and, particularly for schizo phrenia, in Burke (1936 ). However, before reporting on the range of “early” symptoms in clinical High-Risk states, some conceptual clarifications are necessary since the terms “initial/early,” “precursor,” “prodromal,” and “basic” symptoms cannot be used inter changeably. The concept of early symptoms is credited to Bleuler portraying the sump toms of early schizophrenia. They characterize predelusional states as in Eluding unspecific and seldom recognizable Effective symptoms, such as indifference and apathy, obsessive and compulsive ideation and “hysteric and neurasthenic” fluctuant symptoms. The (p. 840) concept of “prodromal” symptoms is attributed to May er-Gross and these include change in activity, psychasthenic complaints and the lack of Effective resonance, depersonalization phenomena, compulsive symptoms without anti ety, hypochondriac symptoms, compulsive symptoms, and whirlwind thought processes (manic tonality). Further analysis of the early stages of schizophrenia by Huber and Gross allowed for the use of the terms “precursor” and “prodromal” sump toms. The “precursor” symptoms represented symptoms that precede (months) the prodromal phase and psychosis and are of limited duration—hours/days (rarely months/years)—completely remitting before psychosis. The term “prodromal” symptoms considered those that pre ceding psychosis would not remit on during the state and that would show a fluctuating course. The concept of basic symptoms was laid by Huber to de scribe the subjective experiences lived and depicted by patients in the initial phases of schizophrenia and in post-psychotic states. These included fluctuating cognitive, motive tonal (fatigability, reduction of energy and resistance, reduction in activity, indecision/ ambivalence), and emotional experiences and the reduction in coping capacity (to changes), the will to be with others and patience (experience of irritability and disco fort). They also included perceptual disturbances ranging from sight, noise, taste and smell, or cenesthetic experiences. These symptoms were not specific to schizophrenia, but present in organic brain syndromes and in melancholic depression too. These studies considered symptoms defined retrospectively (after the diagnosis of psychosis), an ap roach that was later abandoned to in Cavour of the use of these terms in prospective analysis. However, a subset of these symptoms—taken as “basic” symptoms—were found to be predictive of subsequent development of psychosis, particularly schizophrenia. These include nine cognitive disturbances (Cognitive Disturbances scale: COGDIS), such as subjective disturbances of thought process (interference, blockages, pressure), as well as inability to divide attention, disturbances of expressive and receptive speech, unstable ideas of reference, and captivation of attention by details of visual field.

Psychosis High-Risk States Also, and notably for the study of the early symptoms of psychosis, seminal literature has focused on the predelusional state of mind, evoking good representations of what today would characterize a prodromal state (“the augury of something or happening” ). Important depictions include those of Jasper and particularly of Con rad (1997, translated in Brooke et al. 2013 ). The latter depicts the initial phase of psy chosis (“trema”) as a change in the atmosphere where the all-together perceptual field becomes imbued with subtle changes of uncertainty and threat. Patients report expert Incing an increased tension “as if there was something in the air” and a reduction of their capacity to act upon reality (they felt they could not move or make decisions as be fore).

However, most empirical research is traced only to the 1960s in both European psychic try, with Huber’s concept of basic symptoms (see later), and in American-Australian psychiatry and data that, two decades later, would serve as the basis for retrospective early detection studies proposing that 73% of all pa taints with psychosis had a five-year prodromal phase (Häfer et al. 1992; Häfer et al. 1998 ). Basic symptoms are subjective disturbances in drive, affect, thinking, speech, per caption, motor action, central vegetative functions, and stress tolerance occurring in psy chosis. For example, the basic symptom, “thought pressure,” a self-reported “chaos” of unrelated thoughts, can be described as follows: “If I am stressed out my mind gets chaotic and I have great problems thinking straight. Too many thoughts come up at once” ( Schultz-Utter 2009:7). Unlike (p. 841) positive psychotic symptoms, basic sump toms are not associated with abnormal thought content and reality testing and insight is preserved. Longitudinal studies on basic symptoms in putatively prodromal patients by Klosterkotter (KlosterköOtter et al. 2001) supported their very high sensitivity (96%) and high specificity (70%) for transition to schizophrenia.

In the 1990s in Australia, the criteria for a Ultra-High-Risk (UHR) group were developed by Jackson, McGorry, and Bung and the first clinical service for subjects at risk for developing psychosis was created by Bung et al.. UHR criteria include three cohorts of persons as High-Risk: the attenuated psychotic symptoms (APS) group, including subjects with subthreshold (for intensity of frequency) psychotic symptoms; the brief limited intermittent psychotic episode (BLIP) group which refers to phenomena that are frankly psychotic, but occurring for short periods of time; genetic risk and deterioration syndrome (GRD) group which expresses vulnerability de fined through family history of psychosis or diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder in the individual, coupled with decline in functioning.

Various points are relevant for the discussion that the clinical High-Risk states are bi ached to the schizophrenia spectrum, that criteria are heterogeneous, and nuder ous instruments exist to detect these disorders.

The first point refers to the fact that many of the sources of the criteria identify features of the schizophrenic spectrum (including language disturbances, isolation, and blunting of affect). Indeed, and despite the fact that criteria are meant to identify risk for psy Psychosis High-Risk States chosis, research has shown that they are strongly biased toward detection of schizo phrenic psychosis. A meta-analysis of twenty-three studies on subjects at risk for psy chosis has shown that criteria for psychosis risk are biased toward an identification of early phases of schizophrenia spectrum rather than Effective psychosis: 73% of subjects who transitioned to psychosis met schizophrenic spectrum criteria, while only 11% met criteria for Effective psychosis. Recent interest in studying the bipolar at-risk state has allowed new instruments being developed to detect subjects at risk such as the Bipolar Prodrome Symptom Interview and Scale–Prospective (BPSS-P). However, these are not currently routinely included in UHR assess Bent.

Secondly, the criteria for clinical High-Risk states identify distinct features leading to a significant heterogeneity in samples. Some of the criteria are epistemological rules—for instance, having a family history of schizophrenia as in the genetic risk and deterioration syndrome (GRD), while others comprise phenomenological features—such as the basic symptoms (BS) and the attenuated psychotic symptoms (APS) group of UHR. Despite this, these states now have a comprehensive volume of re search to sustain their clinical relevance and their consistency and validity. These include evi Fence from neurocognitive studies (for metanalysis see; genetic and imaging studies (for metaanalysis see: Smieskova et al. 2010; Fusar-Poi, Radua et al. 2012; Fusar-Poi et al. 2011), functional; and neurochemical imaging studies. This chapter focuses specifically on the phenomenological criteria (APS and BS) and considers other candidates for relevant phenomena in the clinical High- Risk states including the Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience, Truman symptoms (p. 842), and abnormal bodily phenomena. Both the APS and BS select subjects with sub-threshold phe novena for a psychotic episode, which portray subtle changes in their experiencing of themselves (including their thoughts) and the world. Despite their similarities APS and BS segregate different subjects, APS detecting later and clinically more relevant phases while BS aim to identify earlier phases which could also be the target of intervention ( Ke shaman et al. 2011; KlosterköOtter et al. 2013 ). Some have suggested that their simultane ous use would allow higher significance for transition.

Secondly, the criteria for clinical High-Risk states identify distinct features leading to a significant heterogeneity in samples. Some of the criteria are epistemological rules—for instance, having a family history of schizophrenia as in the genetic risk and deterioration syndrome (GRD), while others comprise phenomenological features—such as the basic symptoms (BS) and the attenuated psychotic symptoms (APS) group of UHR. Despite this, these states now have a comprehensive volume of re search to sustain their clinical relevance and their consistency and validity. These include evi Fence from neurocognitive studies (for metanalysis see; genetic and imaging studies (for metaanalysis see: Smieskova et al. 2010; Fusar-Poi, Radua et al. 2012; Fusar-Poi et al. 2011), functional; and neurochemical imaging studies. This chapter focuses specifically on the phenomenological criteria (APS and BS) and considers other candidates for relevant phenomena in the clinical High- Risk states including the Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience, Truman symptoms (p. 842), and abnormal bodily phenomena. Both the APS and BS select subjects with sub-threshold phe novena for a psychotic episode, which portray subtle changes in their experiencing of themselves (including their thoughts) and the world. Despite their similarities APS and BS segregate different subjects, APS detecting later and clinically more relevant phases while BS aim to identify earlier phases which could also be the target of intervention ( Ke shaman et al. 2011; KlosterköOtter et al. 2013 ). Some have suggested that their simultane ous use would allow higher significance for transition.

The third point refers to the complexity range of measures and instruments used in the depiction of clinical High-Risk states as well as those that select BS symptoms. The first include the Comprehensive Assessment of At-Risk Mental State (CAARMS) (created in Melbourne in the Personal Assessment and Crisis Evaluation ); the Structured Interview for Prodromal Symptoms (SIPS) and the companion Scale of Prodro mal Symptoms (SOPS); the Early Recognition Inventory for the Retro spective Assessment of the Onset of Schizophrenia (ERIraos) (Häfer et al. 2013); the Basel Screening Instrument for Psychosis (BSIP) (Richer-Rössler et al. 2007; Richer- Rössler et al. 2008), or even a self-rating prodromal scale. The CAAR Psychosis High-Risk States MS in Australia and SIPS/SOPS in the United States are equivalent of those with dissemi anted use including those used in Europe. The ERIraos is used in Germany and Italy to assess schizophrenia onset retrospectively and BSIP is a Basel scale developed in an Ear ly Detection of Psychosis Clinic. For the BS the Bonn Scale for the Assessment of Basic Symptoms (BSABS) was the original scale and comprehensively ad dressed these symptoms. These cognitive and perceptual experiential features can be as Fessed by the Schizophrenia Proneness Instrument, Adult version SPI-A and its child and youth version SPI-CY. Other instruments focus on particular subsets of phenomena which are can dilates for clinical relevance in clinical High-Risk states including the anomalous self-ex periences which are encompassed in the EASE (Examination of Anomalous Self-Expert Once ) and abnormal bodily phenomena as the ABPq (Abnormal Bodily Phenomena questionnaire ).

Attenuated Psychotic Symptoms and Basic # Symptoms This section assembles and details the phenomena that have been considered both in the APS and BS as providing early detection of risk of developing psychosis. Despite the amount of research on the presence and reliability of these symptoms, we recommend some phenomenological a prior premises that should be borne in mind when analyzing the available literature. First, many of the phenomena that are studied in the High-Risk states are transposed from full-blown functional psychosis (particularly schizophrenic psychosis) and were therefore depicted in established psychiatric disorders and not in adolescence or early adulthood. Before taking at face value the narration of experiences in schizophrenic and Effective psychosis one must take in consideration the impact of the coexistent thought and language (p. 843) disturbances—together these might produce a second level of changes in experiences and symbols being used by patients (not the nor mal narration of disturbed experiences but the disturbed narration of normal expert Fences). This leads us to the second suggestion—that the “intact insight and reality test ing” considered in the High-Risk states is key to the psychopathological import of Cereal ization and depersonalization experiences. The derealization and depersonalization that are deeply imbued in the construct of psychosis rely highly on the fact that the person has lost contact with reality (e.g. delusions and hallucinations), as other forms of these experiences are fairly common in non-psychotic situations such as in anxiety and adaptive reactions. So for them to remain valuable in the assessment of High-Risk states great care and detail should be taken in the analysis of the phenomena these persons portray. And this hints at the last problem: that the concept of psychosis stands for a radical change in subjectivity which includes a loss of contact with reality and a heterogeneous range of phenomena where thought processes, and new bodily and world meanings occur and lead to subjective arousal. The phenomena in High-Risk states, by their incentive na Cure, are conceptually apart from the drastic change of a psychotic state. All three rea sons make the phenomenological Inquiry of these states as stimulating as it is ambitious Psychosis High-Risk States and we present the state-of-the-art position with regard to their study across objective and subjective phenomena.

Objective Phenomena The identification of the objective phenomena occurring in High-Risk states can come from the clinician but also from family and friends who identify various behavioral changes which are present in a third-person perspective. Most of them involve changes in social and occupational functioning. Some of these symptoms are identified as negative symptoms including being socially withdrawn and presenting autistic features. In adj son to (and often preceding) attenuated positive symptoms of psychosis, social isolation, impaired occupational functioning, and difficulties in interpersonal relationships, as well as other negative symptoms, are among the main presenting complaints of subjects seek ing help and meeting criteria for psychosis risk. In fact, impairment in psychosocial fun toning is a characteristic feature of the psychosis risk state, Basso sated with poor longitudinal outcome.

Moreover, High-Risk subjects usually present with comorbid diagnoses, such as anxiety, depression, and substance use disorders. Multicenter studies on large High-Risk samples showed that the most common positive symptoms are unusual thought content and perceptual abnormalities. Regarding negative symptoms, half of High-Risk subjects experience poor functioning and a significant proportion presents decreased ideational richness, while disorganization symptoms are less frequently noted. Trouble with focus and Batten son is usually the most common disorganized symptom, whereas dysphoric mood is the general symptom more often portrayed. Some studies reported more severe negative symptoms at presentation, followed by positive, general, and Visor ganization symptoms. Amongst negative symptoms, social anhedonia is the most common. Suicidal ideation is also present in a significant proportion of subjects at risk for psychosis. (p. 844) More than half of High-Risk patients have at least mild suici dal ideation, while almost half of them have attempted suicide before engaging with an early intervention service.

Subjective Phenomena Many, if not the larger part, of the phenomena that constitute APS and BS are subjective in nature—self-reported changes in experiencing ( Bung and McGorry 1996; KlosterköOtter et al. 2013). Some are broad-spectrum and encompassed in descriptive psychopathology textbooks including neurotic-like symptoms such as changes in concentration and Batten son, diminution of initiative and motivation, general anxious and depressive moods, and social isolation. Others have been conceptualized in more detail and include a disturb Dance in the understanding of reality (e.g. perplexity and other derealization and Leper sonalization phenomena), disturbance in thought process experienced as hyperreflexivity, diminished sense of presence and increased distance to the world, and a change in stance Psychosis High-Risk States —existence as “singular.” Also some specific sets of phenomena have now been opera tionalized in the clinical High-Risk states, including Truman symptoms, anomalous subjective self-experiences, and abnormal bodily phenomena. This section discusses the former changes and presents the state-of-the art position of the latter phenomena.

Disturbed Grip on Reality: Perplexity, Derealization, and Depersonal ization Phenomena Early psychiatric literature portrays the features of impending psychosis as arrangements of perplexity, depersonalization, and derealization experiences which are included in the ideas of delusional atmosphere/mood. Such states are depicted as a “psychologically ire ducible... subtle, pervasive, and strangely uncertain light—intolerable but vague content (sensations, mood)” ( Jasper 1963: 98). Such a perplexed subject is depicted as enduring “the oppressive awareness of one’s inability to cope with a given internal and external sit Cation, this awareness being experienced as something that cannot be explained, some thing that has to do with one’s own self” ( Starring 1940: 79). This subject also suffers a decrease in their empathic capacity and/or a decline in psychic and motor activity and/or a detachment from the world (see more in Störing 1987). The relation of perplexity with early psychosis is inscribed in seminal contributions from Conrad’s depiction of trema, described as a state of hyper-awareness similar to that experienced by an actor just be fore going on stage where reality is saturated with hidden/mysterious qualities not in the foreground, “rather all what constitutes the background, all the surrounding space from which trees and bushes, whisper and ululate arise: they are precisely the very obscurity and background” ( Conrad 1966: 41); to Binswanger and Matussek’s portrayal of sub Sects being “at-mercy” as if “hooked to the perceptual elements” of being enslaved to the world they perceive. This has been ex pressed by Sass more recently expressed: “Every (p. 845) detail and event takes on an ex cruciating distinctness, specialness, and peculiarity—some meaning that always lies just out of reach, however, where it eludes all attempts to grasp or specify it” ( Sass 1992: 52).

Such a disturbed “grip” or “hold” on the world as that appearing in clinical High-Risk states appears to involve deficits in context processing and abnormal discrimination between familiar and strange stimuli leading to perceptual disorganization and disintegration. A composite loss of “perceptual organization” constitutes a failure to structure stimuli and the lack “perceptual integration” characterize a dis turbance of their intermodal synthesis. These have been found in schizophrenia samples and ground various deficits in these subjects who have lost the ability to evaluate context, and particularly in differentiating external and internal stimuli which to ether constitute their unstable reality (that lacks clarity) and their disturbed feeling of presence, and later in the chapter).

Psychosis High-Risk States These subjects also endure another form of disturbance of “grip” conceptualized as the incapacity to coherently deal with the foreground stimuli. Such impediment leads to a dis Curbed focus and to a rigid attention where relevant and non-relevant stimuli both be come salient. This was coined as “the abnormal salience hypothesis”, a term designating how stimuli usually in the background come forward and interfere with those in the foreground. It constitutes a form of disturbance of attention where the subject is unable to focus or becomes abnormally focused on specific stimuli. Such changes occur early on in HR states where the subject complains of losing his ability to focus and his affordances —meaning the things that were previously important in the subject’s experiential world. The HR subject finds it difficult to navigate a world deprived of personal meanings and easily forms strange perspectives on the world he in habits.

However, some reservations remain regarding the unrestricted use of such depersonalize son and derealization phenomena as markers of the risk of psychosis. First, these expert Fences have phenomenological complexity allowing for different portrayals of a phenom non and similar portrayals of different phenomena. Indeed, attempts to break through this phenomenological complexity could be helpful in the distinction of schizophrenic forms from other forms. Second, “depersonalization and derealization” are the third most common psychopath logical symptoms (after anxiety and depressive mood) occurring in non-schizophrenic pathologies, in normal adaptive reactions and in anxiety-provoking situations or even as voluntary responses (e.g. in introspection or meditation ). It would then be possible for anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, and Leper sonalization disorder to have their own constitutive forms. It is possible to postulate particular forms of depersonalization including a “melancholiform” form constituting a state of reduced vitality where sensations or emo sons are less vivid and a “schizophreniform” form that would be traitlike, an internal distance to oneself since childhood, leading to the self becoming externally observed (one’s own body, mind, thoughts, emotions, actions), reflected upon (hyperreflexivity), and therefore felt with a sensation of alienation.

However, some reservations remain regarding the unrestricted use of such depersonalize son and derealization phenomena as markers of the risk of psychosis. First, these expert Fences have phenomenological complexity allowing for different portrayals of a phenom non and similar portrayals of different phenomena. Indeed, attempts to break through this phenomenological complexity could be helpful in the distinction of schizophrenic forms from other forms. Second, “depersonalization and derealization” are the third most common psychopath logical symptoms (after anxiety and depressive mood) occurring in non-schizophrenic pathologies, in normal adaptive reactions and in anxiety-provoking situations or even as voluntary responses (e.g. in introspection or meditation ). It would then be possible for anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, and Leper sonalization disorder to have their own constitutive forms. It is possible to postulate particular forms of depersonalization including a “melancholiform” form constituting a state of reduced vitality where sensations or emo sons are less vivid and a “schizophreniform” form that would be traitlike, an internal distance to oneself since childhood, leading to the self becoming externally observed (one’s own body, mind, thoughts, emotions, actions), reflected upon (hyperreflexivity), and therefore felt with a sensation of alienation.

(p. 846) Yet it is also possible to conceive that for the latter forms (considered of schizo phrenic bearing) there could be secondary forms. At an epistemic level, these secondary or consequential forms would arise as defensive fac tors that occur in but are not distinctive of schizophrenia. Phenomenologically they would be akin to the primary forms yet they would occur in the above disorders even having vo litional (or quasi-volitional) counterparts that would take place in introspection or media son. Indeed, and beyond theoretical consideration, recent studies have explored specific patterns that would in term allow the clarification of schizophreniform, non-schizophrenic forms or even non-pathological Psychosis High-Risk States forms and a study in clinical High-Risk states has particularly focused on this detail.

These disturbances in understanding reality are intimately related with three other exp riences in High-Risk states that are detailed next—an increased preoccupation and cogni Dive introspection (hyperreflexivity), a change in the feeling of “presence,” and the expert Once of singularity of existence.

Hyperreflexivity: (In)Voluntary Rumination and Inward Attitudinal Stance This concept refers to the subjective complaint of an increasing tendency (volitional and non-volitional) to attend to internal processes and to phenomena previously tacitly dealt and to which the subject was not self-conscious. The first (and rather obvious) explanation for High-Risk subjects’ self-absorption derives from the alienation that their states involve—solitude as ground for thinking. Yet, and hinting a possible primary involvement in High-Risk states, that similar self-absorbed configuration of experience is a primary feature of Conrad’s depiction of delusion formation—“the sub Sect turns inward, reflecting and introspecting upon the most trivial things” ( Brooke et al. 2013: 181). Further examination into the latter arrangement has conceptualized this as a psychopathological symptom with two forms—primary (operative) and secondary (compensatory)—a division which appears to be supported by the latest transnational studies.

Automatic or “Operative Hyperreflexivity” is related to the previously described “salience hypothesis” —elements previously in the background of the perceptual field become salient and in need of reflection. The subject’s sense of self is disturbed as such—the normal sense of self—requires that consciousness is at least par sally turned off. It has been described as the “subtle but pervasive replacement of nature al engagement in the world with introspective ruminations” or as a transformation from “retrospective introspection” to a “simultaneous introspection”. Such form of “ overthinking ” is intimately linked with the feeling of being a spectator of one’s own experiences—no longer living (being-in-the-world) and rather thinking (musing on the world). This has been neurobiologically explained as disturbed perceptual intermodal integration and also, and particularly, the inability to “triangulate” all sensory inputs (afferent/body ownership) from his self in action (efferent/body agency) (Gamma et al. 2014; (p. 847) Jeannerod 2003; Paras et al. 1996; Schwabe and Blanche 2007; Tsakiris et al. 2007; Tsakiris 2010; van den Bos and Jeannerod 2002; Wylie and Tregellas 2010).

A reflective (or secondary) hyperreflexivity refers to an ancillary form of overthinking— aiming attention to what would normally be experienced as part of oneself or yet—moving focus from the explicit world to the implicit dimensions of experience (these include cen Aesthetic and proprioceptive experiences). Seminally, this subordinate upsurge in cognitive rumination was conceptualized by as a consequence of Verlust der Psychosis High-Risk States natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit —the loss of the natural self-evidential nature of any thing. Such loss of natural evidence is another link between forms of hyperreflexivity and the previously described disturbed grip on reality and the feeling of perplexity that im Cues High-Risk states. Neurobiologically this could constitute the (over)activation of De fault-Mode Network involved in “self-referential” tasks, part of the “neural circuitry of self” and an altered salience of perceptions.

This is closely related to the diminution in the feeling of being present in the world (see the following section) as in all three forms of hyperreflexivity (isolation, primary, and sec ondary) as “thoughts” are experienced unsuitable alternatives to previous experiential features and understanding of the world—and a painful distance to the world takes hold.

Diminished Self-Presence: Experiential Distance Another key feature of High-Risk states is the sense of decline in one’s presence in the world, together with the feeling that experience is no longer unique to the subject —horn of its Meinhaftigkeit or moiété [myness] and could now become the experience of everyone else. Again as with hyperreflexivity, the loss of self-presence is conceptualized as both primary and secondary. Primary diminished self-presence (dimin shed self-affection) refers to the loss of being present as living and being a unified sub Sect of awareness or agent of action. It is an expression of the distortions of first-person perspective resulting from the loss of ipseity, which will be discussed later in this chapter. At first it can be seen in close relation to the previous experiences: the subject can no longer take for granted his selfhood and many tacit experiences become salient and explicit. Yet such reduction involves more than the loss of ownership and agency, and en tails also the failure to distinguish oneself from others. Neurobiological evidence for disturb Dance of body ownership points to disturbance of bottom-up multisensory integration and areas such as right temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) and posterior parietal cortex. These areas, together with the somatosensory cortex and the insula, are responsible for the neuronal representations of a bodily self.

Another form of experiencing diminished self-presence could refer to intentional or deafen chive processes of withdrawing from the world and reducing the sense of existing or of be ing an agent of action. Many of the previous experiences involve variable degrees of (usu ally high) stress levels that, together with the persistent sense of not being able to cope with reality, result in an appalling experience. It is not surprising if the High-Risk subject attempts (p. 848) to remove himself from such reality and to aim increasingly for self-ob Rectification (to increase clarity on his reality). Indeed this could also explain some of the depersonalization phenomena occurring in post-trauma which would motivate such sec ondary form of removal. These processes appear to involve the same brain correlates— hyperactivation of the Default-Mode Network and the hypoactivation of Central Executive Psychosis High-Risk States Network of the salience network (Moran et al. 2013; Nekovarova et al. 2014; Nygård et al. 2012; Sass and Borda 2015).

Special Sets of Phenomena The following phenomena are selective sets that group the previous phenomena into meaningful clusters of symptoms, which acquire particular importance in the High-Risk research.

Truman Symptoms One of the special forms of derealization and perplexity recognized in High-Risk states was symbolized by the construct—“Truman symptoms” (TS). The idea refers to the 1998 Peter Weir movie, in which the pro agonist (Truman) is first unaware of being in a television show and gradually becomes suspicious that his world is one of constructed reality. TS repre sent a profound change of the subjective experience and of self-awareness, resulting in an unstable first-person perspective with varieties of derealization, disturbed sense of own reship, fluidity of the basic sense of identity, distortions of the stream of consciousness, and experiences of disembodiment. They involve rumination on al treed subjective phenomena and an increasing self-awareness. Keeping the “as if” compo Bent (not a delusion), he might reach a “Truman explanation” that explains what, how, and why he experiences that.

TS are particularly relevant to the psychopathology of UHR group as a form of attenuated psychotic symptom and because they describe the cultural expires ion of a psychopathological phenomena in a group familiar with the information tech nologies (such as the internet and virtual reality).

Anomalous Subjective Self-Experiences The disturbances of the self contain many of the previous descriptions of subjective symptoms and are currently central topics of psychopathological research in High-Risk subjects. Disturbances of the “basic”/“core”/“minimal” self are considered the primary disturbance—mainly represent ing a disruption of ipseity. Such loss of ipseity would then forefront the distortions of the first-person perspective (diminished self-presence and self-affection, changes in process of thought and perception (disturbed grip on the cognitive-perceptual world) including the loss of “natural evidence” and increased reflexivity and also derealization and Leper sonalization experiences (see earlier in the chapter). Disturbances of basic self have strong (p. 849) neurobiological transnational research accounts of delusion formation in prodromal and early phases of psychosis that point to a neurobiological underlying alteration in salience processing of stimulus. The range of Psychosis High-Risk States experiences resulting from the disturbance of ipseity have been operationalized in the EASE and EAWE interview (Examination of Atom aloes Self-Experience and Examination of Anomalous World Experience, respectively). This interview selects phenomena which involve “subjectively experiencing” a dis Curbed way of thinking, being-in-the-world, one’s own body, interpersonal Bela sons, and principles and attitudes on the world one lives in. It has also shown a good internal and external validity and its use in subjects at high risk of psychosis and in prodromal phases of schizophrenia has suggest ed it could be used as an early marker. It should not be understated that a crucial feature of this model is the fact that it is should be assumed as an “overall,” “holistic,” or “gestalt-like” disturbance and not indexed to a single (quantitative) measure.

Abnormal Bodily Phenomena A similar research track has now explored the prevalence and relevance of abnormal bod ily phenomena (ABP) in patients with a first psychotic episode and, in particular, in sub Sects who have been diagnosed with schizophrenia.

ABP have been considered in patients with psychosis and particularly schizophrenia even in their seminal representations. The notion of ABP is related to the ideas of disturbed coenesthesia (Röhricht and Priebe 2002 ), assortments of uncanny bodily feel Dings with or without delusional interpretation, kinesthetic hallucinations, and disruptions of body structure and boundaries. As a group, ABP are subjective phenomena that were taken as quasi-ineffable in nature and lacking sensible, specific, and reliable tools to assess them and therefore, until recently, they have been absent from our diagnostic textbooks.

The “Abnormal Bodily Phenomena Questionnaire” (ABPq) allows a systematized Inquiry of these experiences. Studies us ing ABPq have shown an assortment of bodily phenomena occurring in schizophrenia in the first episode psychosis. These in Elude uncanny feelings of numbness, loss of body vitality, the sense of disappearance of body parts, change in form (such as shrinking or enlargement), dimension (as unusual heaviness or lightness), or even “movement of internal parts” of the body.

Various studies suggest that ABP occur as trait features before the first psychotic episode in patients with schizophrenia (Hensley 1998; KlosterköOtter et al. 2001; Röhricht and Priebe 2002; Stanghellini 2009; Gallese and Jerri 2013; Schultz-Utter, Ruhrmann et al. 2007). The Comprehensive Assessment of At-Risk Mental State scale (CAARMS) already selects disturbances of bodily phenomena as relevant to the High-Risk profile. A recent study explored the prevalence and implications of Abnormal Bodily Psychosis High-Risk States (p. 850) Phenomena in subjects considered at high risk of psychosis and found they were highly prevalent (while absent from matched healthy controls) raising the possibility that ABP could be a phenotypic component of High-Risk psychopathology. Some of the assort ed ABP experiences reported by the High-Risk subjects included: the experience of viola son “when he stretched his hand I felt an energy entering my body. That energy was pounding my right side until it break in”; experience of externalization “I felt that my body had become as a boiling soup and I was no longer in control of my energy that flows around me. Then my body became an ingredient in the soup parts of me are the vapors and rest of the soup”; morbid objectivization “I felt my brain freezing. Then thoughts were moving so slowly I could feel them drive from ear to ear,” and Revitalization “The loss of the animal part in me, I lost it! I feel that I act as I was programmed, even eating and I feel like a robot, even my arms feel artificially attached to me”.

Concluding Remarks The relevance of this contemporary field of research comprises ontological (considering the possibility of prevention and early intervention in psychiatry) and epistemological (merging of assorted neurobiological, philosophical, and epidemiological contributions) novelties. To handle and keep expanding such breadth of knowledge, researchers and clinicians should consider enough conceptual and phenomenological detail on the expert Fences that occur in High-Risk states. Such knowledge is vital in contemporary predictive and transnational research which will ultimately guide the integration of phenomenology cal data with the neurocognitive and neurobiological models. This chapter has reviewed the assortment of phenomena portrayed by subjects in High-Risk states of psychosis and focused on subjective symptoms. In this sense, High-Risk states not only bear the antis Cation of a new scenario in the identification and treatment of psychiatry disorders but al so they have been, and must continue being, an archetype of a phenomenologically in formed psychopathology. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK In this chapter, the relationship between psychopathology and law is examined by focus ing on decision-making capacity (or competence). Jasper’s methodological pluralism and an approach to psychopathology drawing upon phenomenology as a philosophical, quail Dative discipline inform the interdisciplinary approach taken in the chapter. Starting with a short introduction to the legal components of valid consent, it then focuses on decisionmaking capacity (DMC) in the context of frontal brain injury, schizophrenia, and depress ion. DMC is examined using clinical epidemiological methods (in Jasper’s mode of ex placation ) and using clinical phenomenological methods (Jasper’s mode of understand ing ). It is argued that this interdisciplinary approach can further knowledge of the Pele ant decision-making abilities and inabilities and put us in a better position to implement strategies for DMC assessment in practice.

Keywords: psychopathology, phenomenology, law, decision-making capacity, competence, schizophrenia, frontal brain injury, depression # Introduction MIND is central to law and law shares the problem of mind’s anomalies with psychiatry. But psychiatry and law approach psychopathology with very different systems of knoll edge.

Psychiatry, as a branch of medicine, comes at psychopathology with categories of sump toms, diagnoses, biological dysfunction, and treatment. But it also makes use of psycho logical and sociological concepts. Psychology assumes a continuity of psychopathology with normal mental functioning and sociology assumes social determinants of psy chopathology. This plural, or “biopsychosocial,” body moves along. Its organs are probes signal organizations, service delivery, training programs, research activity, and exercises in self-critique. It creates the shared professional language of clinical psychopathology.

Psychopathology and Law Law is concerned with justice and aims to respect the self-determination of adults whom 1 it considers are in sound mind. A core concept for human rights based law is personal autonomy and law operationalizes this with the components of valid consent. In recent decades, these categories have increasingly regulated, or have attempt ed to regulate, areas of health and social care where the language of clinical psy chopathology is indigenous.

In the United Kingdom, and in several other jurisdictions, the psychiatric and legal ap roaches to psychopathology are increasingly mixing and this trend will probably continue. Given the different origins and professional perspex Dives of clinical psychopathology and law this mixing is liable to create confusion but it al so affords opportunities. Several commentators have criticized the current state of (p. 860) clinical psychopathology as narrowly based on symptoms and criticisms of mainstream theories of personal autonomy are also being expressed ( Freyenhagen and O’Shea 2013; Series 2015; Tan, Stewart, and Hope 2009). These critiques emphasize the relational, social, and value-laden aspects of autonomy and complain that mainstream accounts are narrowly individualistic or formal.

When overlapping areas have become narrowed, or soloed, interdisciplinary research be comes important. Progress in both clinical psychopathology and legal understandings of personal autonomy may come from research strategies that include psychiatric, filo sophical, and legal perspectives on psychopathology.

Phenomenology What about phenomenology? In psychiatry the word phenomenology strongly connotes Karl Jasper’s approach to psychopathology with his majestic textbook General Psy chopathology as the primary source. Ghaemi (2007 ) has persuasively ar Cued that the core, and lasting, feature of Jasper’s approach was methodological plural ism—the introduction of the distinction between the methods of understanding ( Verse hen ) and explanation ( Erklären ) to psychiatry’s self-consciousness. But phenomenology also has a specific meaning in philosophy. I understand phenomenology in this philosophical sense as a qualitative discipline that interprets structures of subjective ty or the meanings and values structuring intentional mental life. It is both descriptive and analytical and engages with ethical and ontological matters. This philosophical sense of phenomenology has significant links with psychiatry but much of it lies outside of Jasper’s approach.

On psychopathology and law Jasper was remarkably silent. Before the 1930s he seems (by his own admission) to have taken the Imperial certainties of German mental health law rather too much for granted (Jasper 1963: 793–795, 839–840) and, from the 1940s Psychopathology and Law on, he seems to imply that little could be said about the relation of personal autonomy to psychopathology at all (Jasper 1963: 755–756). That is perhaps understandable given his historical and cultural context. But the twenty-first century context is different and, as we shall see, we need to find balanced ways of thinking about psychopathology from an ethic cal and legal point of view.

Plan for this Chapter Both Jasper’s methodological pluralism and an approach to psychopathology drawing up on phenomenology as a philosophical, qualitative discipline are used to inform the inter disciplinary approach taken in this chapter. It will start with a short introduction to the le gal components of valid consent and then focus on decision-making capacity (DMC) and the clinical categories of frontal brain injury, schizophrenia, and depression. It will look at DMC (p. 861) using clinical epidemiological methods (in Jasper’s mode of explanation ) and then clinical phenomenological methods (Jasper’s mode of understanding —though supplemented by phenomenology in the philosophical sense).

Valid Consent Imagine you are deciding about a treatment, selecting a home, or purchasing a car. Now ask yourself, what makes these decisions valid?

This question concerns law because the decisions involve different parties in society (you, your doctor, your family, your bank, etc.) and law needs to work out whom to justifiably hold accountable should disputes arise. Law’s approach is to posit three elements of valid consent (or valid decision): relevant information, DMC, and voluntariness.

Relevant Information This element recognizes that a person cannot be held accountable for a decision unless they are in possession of, or could be in possession of, relevant and reasonable amounts of information about the nature and consequences of the decision. I might decide to take medication A but if I don’t know that medication A is for psychosis or that it may have side effects then law will question valid consent.

Decision-Making Capacity Decision-making capacity (DMC) is the presumption that the psychological abilities upon which decision-making depends are present. The sort of decision-making abilities that are relevant here are ones that relate to self-determination, or, in other words, abilities to make decisions for oneself. Legislators and courts have the final word on what these abili Psychopathology and Law ties are. Grisso and Appelbaum have distilled much US case law on DMC into a four abilities model.

1. Ability to understand relevant information 2. Ability to appreciate that information 3. Ability to reason with that information 4. Ability to express a choice In English law “appreciation” and “reasoning” are replaced by “use” and “weigh”. Whatever the exact words used, the law is trying to capture abilities to absorb relevant information, deliberate with that information, and effect choice.

The abilities must relate to specific decisions when a decision has to be made (or was made), for example, a treatment decision, a residence decision, a financial decision.

(p. 862) This is the so-called functional test of DMC. It is not a diagnostic test or a test of “reasonable” decision. One can have DMC in the presence of symptoms and a psychiatric diagnosis and one can have it if making a choice that many would regard as unwise or un reasonable. If any of the four abilities are absent then DMC is lacking and valid consent (or refusal) cannot be given but to lack an ability it must be shown that it is due to psy 2 chopathology.

Recent legal debate is addressing a gray area in between valid consent and lacking DMC called “supported decision-making.” The idea is that if an individual with mental disability is at risk of lack of DMC then the provision of support may remove that risk and enable valid consent to be achieved. Debate focuses on what this support should look like and its scope and limits.

Voluntariness Voluntariness is the requirement that choices are not valid if they are coerced. In the ex Creme case a gun to the head with the threat to pull the trigger unless tenth is decided rather than Y is not a valid consent to tenth even if all relevant information is disclosed to the per son deciding and all decision-making abilities (see above) are present. In practice cur son comes in shades and the law gives recognition of a continuum of threat to voluntary Bess with the concept of “undue influence.”

With this brief legal outline of valid consent in place we can see that the component where psychopathology most clearly becomes relevant is DMC. But we can also see that clinical psychopathology and DMC are not the same thing. To look at psychopathology through the perspective of DMC is to look at it differently.

Psychopathology and Law # Explaining DMC in Terms of Clinical Psy # chopathology One way to explain (in Jasper’s sense) DMC in terms of clinical psychopathology is through the use of operationalized measures and the statistical methods of epidemiology. Random sampling from clinical settings using ICD-10 codes, symptom scales, and a Bali dated tool for the assessment of DMC (the “MacCAT-T” ) al lows measurements of both clinical psychopathology and DMC and for associations be tween these variables to be tested statistically.

Here I will summarize a selection of studies from the literature that illustrate this ap roach at work and which contribute to knowledge in psychopathology and law.

(p. 863) Psychiatric Versus Medical Much debate has concerned whether there is an essential difference between psychiatric disorders and medical disorders but how does this debate re late to DMC? When acute psychiatric settings were compared with acute medical settings on prevalence of DMC for treatment there were in fact no significant differences. If one performs a subanalysis of the relevant decisionmaking abilities, then inability to appreciate was more salient than reasoning in the psy chiatric setting and vice versa in the medical setting.

So a remarkable parity exists between psychiatry and the rest of medicine in terms of DMC; but the underlying decision-making inabilities in the two settings are different. Ap preciation is a more evaluative ability than reasoning and because the fact/value dichoto my and relativistic attitudes toward values are so influential in contemporary culture it is likely that the objectivity of DMC assessment will attract more skeptic ism in psychiatric contexts than medical ones. But reasoning is also an area of consider able debate in psychology and philosophy because of plentiful evidence of poor reasoning in the healthy population and so skepticism can be directed to the medical setting also. This parity of skepticism simply points to the need for more in-depth study of what appreciation and reasoning, or “use or weigh” abilities mean.

Frontal Brain Injury In a sizable number of cases of damage to the human frontal lobe, neuropsychology has been unable to measure impairment despite patients having marked problems with behavior and self-awareness post brain damage. The famous case of Phineas Gage is a prototype here and in many similar cases DMC is at is sue. In a study of patients with frontal brain injury using detailed neurocognitive tests and a legal standard for the appreciation ability, Freer and colleagues ( Freer, Devivo, No Psychopathology and Law Back, Krzywanski, and Arson 2008 ) reported that the problems meeting the apprecia son standard were unexplained by extant neurocognitive measures. This clarifies an in teresting conceptual problem: what kind of evidence is of use in assessments of DMC in frontal brain injury? In-depth clinical phenomenological studies may help us arrive at an answer.

Schizophrenia The symptom profile of schizophrenia is varied and complex and the validity of the jag Gnostic category remains disputed. Which symptoms associate most strongly with DMC for treatment in people with schizophrenia? A study of inpatients with psychotic symptoms found that there is a rank order in the strength of (p. 864) association. Delusions and thought disorder associated most strongly and halluci nations and cognitive impairment associated least strongly. Also, the category of schizophrenia was associated with regaining DMC more slowly compared with other diagnoses.

So, looked at through the perspective of DMC for treatment, the symptoms of schizophre nia that are of greatest interest are delusions and thought disorder rather than hallucina sons and cognitive impairments. And if one wants to know about time-frames for regain ing DMC, then the diagnosis of schizophrenia is not without predictive validity. Many questions remain however about what is underpinning these associations between schizo phrenia and DMC.

Depression Depressive is extremely common and can be severe, recurrent, and disabling. The psych attic literature on depression is vast and there is good evidence for effective treatments. But how does depression impact upon DMC for treatment? Systematic review of empire cal evidence reveals a tiny literature in this area and DMC tools have measurement prob ems. This may not be a practical problem if psych artists have other reliable ways of identifying DMC. One possibility is the clinical concept of insight. If a patient with severe depression is unable to decide for themselves about treatment then, so the thought may go, they will lack insight and be flagged up for probes signal attention that way. But studies of depression and insight show that insight lacks sensitivity for severe depression and also lacks sensitivity as a test of DMC. In other words, patients with severe depression do not have characteristically low scores on insight and high scores on insight can be consistent with lacking DMC.

Psychopathology and Law So we have another conceptual gap and a new question: what are the relevant variables for losing the ability to decide for oneself in depression? Again, in-depth clinical phenom ecological studies may help.

Understanding Mental Capacity in Terms of # Clinical Phenomenology We have seen that explaining DMC in terms of clinical psychopathology yields a kind of knowledge. It gives a pragmatic mapping and identifies gaps where more basic concept al work is required. Where gaps are found the methods of understanding become indict ed to illuminate the meaningful relations between states of mind and abilities to self-de ermine. Here sampling is purposeful rather than random and interpretation is in depth rather than statistical. A method of second-person phenomenology has been adapted for this purpose. In brief, this method uses first-per son reports but (p. 865) probes and interprets them in the context of an open-structured interview in which the interviewer (and research team) aim to make sense of the reports and what they imply for self-determination. I will now report on some studies which, us ing this method, address some of the gaps identified above.

Frontal Brain Injury The gap between neurocognitive tests of human frontal brain function and inability to use and weigh information, discussed above, requires a bridge to be constructed. A recent study reviewed relevant neuropsychological research on awareness of deficit, meta-cogni son, and somatic markers and conducted in-depth interviews with people with frontal brain injury. A key finding concerned online awareness of disability. Consider this excerpt from an interview with a research partici pant with injury to the frontal lobe: ABI4: It was really weird because in the hospital, everyone else was really bad.

Like they could’t walk or talk, totally mute.... But I was fine, I was walking and talking, and I thought everything was fine. And when I went home, I was like gone. I could’t walk, could’t walk upstairs. I was stuck in bed, and I could’t talk.... But when I was walking and talking I was fine. Every single day in the hospital I was asking if I could go home. “I want to go home, I want to go home.

I’m fine, look at me. You can see I’m fine.” So eventually they gave in and said “Go on then, go home.” And once I was home it was just different, you know. Before that I’d felt like I was better, I was fine....

INTERVIEWER: So when you were in hospital you felt it was all ok, you were walk ing around, you could speak, think, express yourself...?

ABI4: I was feeling fine,... but once I got out of hospital I realized how bad I was.

Psychopathology and Law INTERVIEWER: Outside of hospital it din’t work out?

ABI4: No, that’s when I realized how bad I was.

The excerpt shows that ABI does have awareness of his disability (“I realized how bad I was”). In the interview, and retrospectively, ABI shows awareness of his disability. But the excerpt also attests to an episode in which ABI lacked that awareness in a context when a decision had to be made.

A few minutes later in the interview: ABI4: I want to get out, have a fresh start where no one knows me, and I don’t know anybody, and start all over again. Start totally fresh, start a totally fresh life, a totally fresh life.

INTERVIEWER: And when you think like that, do you want to do it by yourself, alone, or do you want help from others?

ABI4: Do it myself.

INTERVIEWER: Do it yourself?

ABI4: Yeah. I mean my uncle, when he got out of the nick... 9 years or 10 years.... He’s out now, he’s living up north.... When I get out of hospital I could go and see him....

INTERVIEWER: So what you’re saying is that what you prefer is to start again, without any help from others. That’s very, very different to hospital, isn’t it, where there’s an enormous amount of help that you’re getting.

ABI4: I don’t need this bollocks [hospital care], I’m sick of it.

Recall that ABI has just been articulating his awareness of his disability and significant support needs. But as the conversation began to involve deliberation that implicates fu Cure support needs, he was unable to bring that awareness “online” to inform his deli ion-making. The consequences of such an inability can be seen in an excerpt from a dif ferment participant, in which the difference between offline and online awareness was ex hibited rather dramatically.

INTERVIEWER: I mean, for example, in the restaurant you had somebody kind of shout at you after you got irritated and you kind of got into an argument which had got a bit out of hand, and it sort of started because, whereas before you would have managed the situation, now you lose your temper?

ABI3: Yeah.

INTERVIEWER: Can you think of examples like that?

Psychopathology and Law ABI3: Yeah it does happen. It does happen. [Noise from another patient in back ground.] I’ll go out there and punch her on the Ding nose in a minute if she don’t shut up!

Awareness of disability is an important variable for DMC in the population of patients with frontal brain injury. However, awareness of disability can take different forms (retro spective, concurrent, online) and psychiatry and law need to be able to recognize all of them. Practical consequences for assessment of DMC in frontal brain injury flow from this result.

Schizophrenia Jasper thought that phenomenology was important in identifying schizophrenia as a valid category. In other words, he thought that when psychiatry takes an entirely third-person al approach to schizophrenia (e.g. an entirely biological approach) it was at risk of losing its object. But he thought phenomenology was important in a sort of negative sense. His view seemed to be that in trying to interpret certain core patient experiences we can ex perience a limit in the scope of Verstehen as a method of interpretation (this is what he meant by “un-understandability”). This limit, together with characteristic patient self-de scriptions such as “passivity” experiences, denoted schizophrenic psychic life and dear acted it from Effective psychic life (Jasper 1963: 577–582). So the core phenomenology of schizophrenia for Jasper seemed to be a conjunction of distinctive first-person expert Fences (e.g. passivity symptoms) and a distinctive second-person experience (the inter viewer experiencing a fundamental limit in the interpretability of those experiences).

Assessment of DMC involves interpretation (typically centered on a face-to-face inter view) so what might this Jasperian point mean in relation to DMC assessment?

(p. 867) To illustrate the challenges of interpretation being referred to here, take this speech act from a patient with a diagnosis of schizophrenia.

I went to Samoa. This has been my life in total. I never went there. I was taken there again. We got on the plane that took off, we were supposed to be flying lo cal, we thought, like in France or something. The plane ended up in Tahiti, but the islands were called something in Samoa, so I can’t remember whether it was Thai ti or Samoa we were in. I think we were in Samoa, but my family, someone was saying it was Tahiti. We landed on an Island. In those times they never had airstrips. The plane that brought us down was a cargo plane because they never had passenger planes. My brother got hold of me and there was a great white shark in the water, off a fair bit—it looked like somebody was carrying a door on their back—it was that big the shark, its fin.

Clearly, understanding what is being meant in this communication is going to strain our common sense or folk psychological resources.

Psychopathology and Law In the context of assessment of DMC, Banner and Szmukler have proposed interpretative approaches drawing upon the “radical interpretation” of philosopher Donald Davidson. The suggestion is that in DMC assessment we should aim to clarify the meaning of a decision-making process using the principle of charity. David son developed the principle of charity as a way to interpret any alien speaker from scratch (think of an anthropologist’s task of interpreting the language of a tribe where no assumptions can be made about shared beliefs or words). According to Banner and Sz mukler when, after good faith attempts, radical interpretation does not yield translation of meaning about a decision-making process—or a person’s will—then one may be unable to attribute DMC. They draw a parallel with Jasper’s concept of un-understandability.

A different interpretative approach is to try to understand the phenomenological strum Cure of the decision-making abilities and inabilities at play in schizophrenia. On this ap roach, lacking DMC in schizophrenia is not inherently to do with un-understandability but to do with distinct psychological threats to self-determination. When overt delusion or thought disorder is stripped back to its meaning with close textual interpretation of dia Rogue what kind of underpinning cognitive and emotional rigidity of decision-making can be identified? And how does this rigidity threaten the ability to use or weigh information in decision-making? This is work in progress.

Depression Psychopathologists have often remarked on the understandable nature of depression. It is, for example, easy to empathize with feeling bad or hopeless in the wake of the Mega Dive life events that often accompany a depressive episode. But in relation to DMC for treatment this can be a catch. Appelbaum and Roth have put it well in the context of challenges in general medicine: Of all the psychopathological processes associated with refusal [of medical treat Bent], depression is the most difficult to recognize, because it masquerades as, “Just the way I would (p. 868) think if it happened to me”... The depressed pa taint is frequently able to offer “rational” explanations for the choices that are made.

We have seen that there is work to do to specify decision-making abilities in depression. A key finding from a recent study aiming to do this concerns temporal inability.

This excerpt illustrates what requires interpretation: interviewer: What’s in your mind?

d4: Well nothing interviewer: And in your feelings?

Psychopathology and Law d4: No, I ain’t got no feelings...

interviewer: Do you feel sad?

d4: No I don’t feel sad, I got no feelings at all, I don’t think. I’m anxious again. You know... everything’s a distraction... to take me away from what’s going to hap pen. You know I go back to my room and lie there ready, that’s why I lie in my room.

interviewer: Ready for what?

d4: Ready for death.

In this case of someone with severe depression in good physical health, the future was be ing experienced in a characteristic way. The ability to experience the future as open was compromised (death was the dominating awareness) and there was inability to expert Once a present task of deliberation and choice about treatment as shaping the future. There was inability to project oneself into significant normative differences and also in ability to imagine different future treatment scenarios in some degree of detail when needed. Taken together this cluster of temporal inabilities can call into question self-de termination in relation to treatment. How can there be using or weighing about tenth when the future has become normatively flattened in relation to tenth?

In the cases of mild–moderate depression studied, these temporal abilities were pre served and here the concept of supporting deli ion-making to enable valid consent (see above) is likely to be more relevant than DMC assessment.

With an understanding of the relevant abilities and inabilities, we are in a better position to try to implement better strategies for the assessment of DMC in depression.

Conclusion Psychiatry and the law share mind as a problem. Once we step back and reflect that psy chopathology concerns the human being then the shared nature of the problem is not sur rising. Clinicians are concerned with promoting human health and quality of life; law is concerned with ensuring that the human being’s fundamental rights are respected. One point of specific overlap concerns DMC.

This chapter has summarized an interdisciplinary research approach to DMC. Some Alas sic concepts from the clinical psychopathological stable—brain injury, schizophrenia, delusion, insight, and depression—have been looked at through the perspective of DMC (p. 869) and using the methodological pluralism of Jasper. Starting with the perspective (or lens) of “Erklären,” measurement of DMC patterns in selected clinical populations has been presented and this has also clarified some questions that are unsolved such as “how does frontal brain injury or depression impact on abilities to self-determine?” These ques Psychopathology and Law sons have then been addressed using the perspective of Verstehen and this has genera ed new hypotheses about decision-making abilities (i.e. opportunities for the perspective of Erklären to grow) but also new illuminations of self-determination to aid those who must assess DMC in individuals. Ultimately, the assessment and navigation of DMC re Bates to a single human being and, as Jasper taught us, a human being will elude the sin gle perspective of either Erklären or Verstehen.

Much work is still to be done in this area of psychopathology and law and the field of re search is comparatively new. But there are grounds to think the interdisciplinary ap roach outlined here contributes to a balanced and objective understanding of the Korma Dive dimensions of psychopathology.

Acknowledgments The Welcome Trust supported this work. PAGE_BREAK 1 ( ) See e.g. Justice Benjamin Cardozo’s classic statement of this principle in Schloendorff v. Society of New York Hospital, 105 N.E. 92. “Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be done with his own body.” This has been repeated in various forms in superior courts since.

2 ( ) There is some debate about whether this “due to” requirement is superfluous but, if it is superfluous, it will be superfluous because the absence of the psychological abilities is a mental inability itself (i.e. a mental anomaly). So, either way, psychopathology and lack ing DMC have a deep connection.

Gareth S. Owen Clinical Senior Lecturer, Mental Health, Ethics and Law Research Group Department of Psychological Medicine, Weston Education Center, Institute of Psychiatry, Psycho ogy and Neuroscience, King’s College London, UK Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter Cristina Cost, Sergio Carmenates, Lu's Madeira, and Giovanni Stanghellini The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Sep 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Atmospheres in the clinical encounter are intersubjective phenomena experienced by the participants in that situation. In this chapter we will first unveil essential aspects of the ontology and the phenomenology of atmospheres and their role in the process of under standing. We will suggest a specific attitude during the psychiatric interview that allows the assessment of these phenomena, which we coin fragile understanding, relying on the pre-reflective domains of experience. We conclude that the training of psychiatrists in this kind of understanding might have important implications in the extension of the science of psychopathology, adding to the accuracy of diagnosis and enhancing the therapeutic di Pension of the psychiatric interview.

Keywords: intersubjective, phenomenology, psychopathology, atmospheres, fragile understanding # Introduction MOST of present research in psychiatry focuses on objective phenomena that are measure able both by self-reported scales and semi-structured interview schedules. Yet some ques son the assumption of improved reliability and accuracy of clinical diagnoses and we’ve witnessed a viral proliferation of the so-called co-morbidity. Yet comorbidity is problematic as “in psychiatry, cases of true co-morbidity are relatively rare since, for most disorders, we do not know enough about the underlying pathophysiology to be able to determine whether the disorders are truly clinically distinct”. Some consider that there has been no etiological, pathogenic, or therapeutic breakthrough and that our awe is mainly due to technology-driven developments. One concern is the possibility of the strengthening of academic anti-psychiatry, another is the increasingly worrying credibili ty of psychiatry as a profession. The specific pressures of clinical and academic career profiles have made researchers who are lacking clinical skills and clinicians who may not find the time or skills to carry out research. We see sim ple questions such as “What is characteristic of Schizophrenia?” keep eluding clinicians Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter and scientists in our field, and their answers are unsatisfying to both. Most relevant to the present moment is the possibility of multidisciplinary teams that could encompass clinical and mathematical skills and also other skills such as those from cognitive science, neuroscience, and humanities.

Some of the present contributions to respond to these denigration include reappraising the nature of psychiatric phenomena and, in particular, identifying the role of subjectivity and intersubjectivity. Schizophrenia is a particularly good example of these phenomena where seminal descriptions include “a peculiar transformation of feeling, thinking and perceiving, found nowhere else in this particular fashion” or “we have in tuition of a whole which we call schizophrenia but we do not grasp it. Instead we enu Aerate a vast number of particulars... while each of us only comprehends the whole from (p. 873) his own new experience of actual contact with such patients” ( Jasper 1997: 581–582). This has been considered under the premise of a disturbance of subjectivity by some European psychopathologists. They consider that it is inherent to a disturbance of a prototypical core self whose properties were not fluctuating surface psychotic symptoms but trait enduring features that have been present since early life. More recently, others consider that changes in the intersubjective taking place in the encounters with patients also seem to be implicated in the early detection of schizophrenia. The appraisal of what these elements represent place the reader in the field that this chapter focuses on—atmospheres and their disturbances.

These elements, ineffable and unarticulated in our psychopathological textbooks, are therefore dismissed from the psychiatric interview. Blini sans are forced to identify and describe the assortment of phenomena that are select ed in classical psychopathological textbooks and to a process of distancing themselves to a third-person perspective and a conceited scientific attitude that restricts the possibil ties of the encounter. Both of these are a product of operational definitions and of the creation of diagnostic criteria, whose utility is unarguably linked to the contemporary ef fort to systematize psychiatry. Endorsed by our current nosography, this method has been adulated and applied significantly to the clinical encounter. It has hampered a generation of psychiatrists from identifying intersubjective phenomena, here appraised as a fair part of the clinical encounter bearing psychopathological meaning and also ground for the core of scientific knowledge of psychiatry.

Assessing and appraising atmospheres requires that we question two scientific premises: an aseptic and static observation of phenomena in a third-person perspective allows their full disclosure (the position where mental symptoms present themselves) and the dualistic intuition that encompasses our scientific minds suits the exploration of these phenomena. With this in mind, the experience of atmospheres is grounded on the suspend ion of two prejudices. The first one refers to the idea that the active participation in the encounter compromises the objectivity of the encounter. The second one concerns the in tuitive reduction of phenomena to polarized qualities that are expected to define them.

Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter # Ontology of Atmospheres Atmospheres are indeterminate above all as regards their ontological status. We are not sure whether we should attribute them to the objects or environments from which they proceed or to the subjects who experience them. We are also un sure where they are. They seem to fill the space with a certain tone of feeling like a haze.

(Böhme 1993: 114)

Is the Nature of Atmospheres Subjective or Objective?

As phenomena, atmospheres are ineffable and therefore their nature eludes most descrip sons. They could be considered emotions, perceptions, or emotional salience, (p. 874) emotional aspects of a situation that are immediately noticed prior to cognitive determi nation. Their distinctive feature is that they arise in the space between a person (or a sentient being) and a setting (person, thing, or situation) and are not trace able to them. So they are unlike ordinary emotions in the fact that they have no directedness—subject to an object—and they are felt as emerging from the out side of the subject’s body. This description is similar to the depiction of emotions by the pre-Socratic philosophers or by Homer as external forces hitting the subject who feels them. Keeping an indeterminate location and direction, they have an ontologically intermediate status, which allows them to inform the subject about himself (subjectively) and about the world (objectively).

In order to understand the experience of atmospheres one must avoid sustaining an intro jectionist conception of feelings and attributing them directly to the subject. These are in tuitive conceptions, brought to us by our cultural embedding, yet not suitable to our ob Sect of study. Instead consider the existence of bodily experiences as anterior to abstract sons as such or that simply do not fit them. In this sense, Schlitz’s work toward the ab solute desubjectivization of emotions, including atmospheric ones, goes to the extreme of considering them as autonomous objects, entirely independent from the subject and the other elements in space. Boehme does not go as far, considering the at mosphere the product of Ekstases, Effective qualities radiating from objects, a place, or a person, tincturing the space between (Böhme 1993). Groundbreaking as they are, these conceptions do not divert from the ontological dualism that impedes the understanding of the atmospheric phenomenon. Griffero gives us a more consistent look, depicting it as “an in-between made possible by the co-presence of subject and object,” safeguarding howev er, that “the in-between is not reified to the point of counting as a third element which, as a membrane, is interposed between the two margins” ( Griffero 2014: 121). Instead, at mospheres are to be regarded as fragile phenomena, whose existence depends on the participation of the subjects who perceive them and whose objectivity depends on the possibilities of feeling of participants, for they are ever-changing “constantly seek(ing) re Hewed completion” ( Grant 2013: 23; Cost et al. 2014).

Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter Are Atmospheres Interior or Exterior Phenomena?

Pictorialists, artists that belong to the aesthetic movement that dominated photography during the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, aim at eliciting atmospheres by the use of vague shapes and blurred contour lines in their pictures (Nordström 2008). Their focus in the photo is quite literally on the air itself rather than the concrete objects photographed, which they find, is accountable for the general feeling conveys. Hence a key aspect of the atmospheric perception: atmospheres refer to the elusive and almost in definable air that imbues and envelops a given situation. As intermedi ate phenomena that blur the objective–subjective dichotomy, their spatiality dwells in the loosened lines between inferiority and exteriority, “filling the space between, not as a ma Aerial object which fills another espousing the shape the other imposes” ( Minkowski 1936: 86) “but rather as a vibration in which the perceived and the perceive meet and merge” ( Griffero 2014: 6). They are spatially diffuse feelings that convey basic emotional tones to the lived space, which resemble Stern’s vitality affects and their dynamic quail ties. These include for instance “calming,” “relaxing,” “comforting,” “tense,” “heavy,” or “light” tones that animate (p. 875) or dampen the background sense of life. For instance, in the sentence “the ambiance in the room was tense,” one is referring both to a private interior and a collective exterior phenomenon.

Phenomenology of Atmospheres Perception of an In-between As intermediate phenomena atmospheres are not traceable to either of the individual par ticipants. This is a very important point since it differentiates them from auras, the con Dept introduced by Benjamin, to portray an objective property that emanates and therefore belongs to a person, or a thing, or a place, as part of their identity or essence. As an example, in ballet the spectator is not expected to experience the aura of the dancers (Cost et al. 2014; Böhme 2013). The object of contemplation is the atmosphere itself which arises while they are performing, “a quasi-thing, not less autonomous in Bela son to things than a melody is in relation to simple noise” ( Griffero 2014: 18). The per caption of atmospheres relies on the acknowledgment of an anti-dualistic autonomy to this in-between that is easily seen in less egocentric societies to the present day. In Japan for instance, there is a vast lexicon to designate the dynamics of intermediate phenom na: the ma designates the void or the gap between things, and simultaneously expresses the objective place and the subjective feeling it imparts; the interpersonal Aida, a being between or the original common place that founds both everyday socialite and the individ ual self, the latter both in its external and internal composition and orientation.

Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter Synaesthesia Atmospheres belong to the pre-reflective realm of experience. They are lodged in the pathic moment of perception, where the distinction between subject and object is fuzzy and no experience is monosensorial. Rather, one sense mode automatically elicits other Censorial modalities in a synaesthetic continuum. Their synesthetic nature is perfectly illustrated by Merleau Monty, when referring to the haptic foundations of atoms pheric sounds: “there is an objective sound which reverberates outside me in the instr Bent, an atmospheric sound which is between the object and my body, a sound which vi rates in me as if I had become the flute or the clock” ( Merleau-Monty 2005: 264). Marcel Duchamp’s musical sculpture for instance, entails more than an acoustic experience, a vi Dual-actual one.

Significance

To perceive an atmosphere implies, other than receiving or apprehending Censorial data, the involvement in a situation and the participation in the global awareness of that situ son. Situations encompass an atmospherically perceived significance that precedes any cognitive (p. 876) attribution, which means that they are not grounded in sign-referent semiotics, but in the effect produced in the lived body. Nevertheless, the attempts to reproduce them in the various forms of art—by choreographers, directors, painters, perfumers, etc.—proves their accessibility to reflective exercise. This reflective potentiality leads us to its relevance in the clinical encounter, which we will expose in the following section.

Phenomenological Assessment In order to experience an atmosphere one must be predisposed to receiving it. According to Schlitz this predisposition is what allows the distanced influence of atmospheres (Böhme 1993 ). The potential inclusiveness of an aesthetic attitude in the phenomenology cal method used in the psychiatric interview resides in two features that are common to the aesthetic object and to the phenomenological object, which are the aesthetic prop reties of an object can only appear if one allows the object’s detachment from one’s intel son, just as the phenomenon appears when one is detached from any preconceptions; the aesthetic properties only arise when the object is stripped of its ordinary meaning, likewise, the phenomenon appears when our pre-reflective natural attitude is suspended. Duchamp’s ready-Fades, whose aesthetic appraisal re quires us to suspend common sense, are an example of this intersection.

Atmospheres as Objects of Psychiatry How are such fragile and unstable phenomena capable of psychopathologic meaning? The relevance of atmospheres in psychiatry is not without precedence. In his book La Schizo phrénie, Minkowski claims that a psychiatrist should do more than enumerate symptoms “observing like a passive spectator, like when we are observing a microscopic slide, list Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter ing and classifying psychotic symptoms to achieve a so-called ‘scientific’ diagnosis is not going to be enough.” The psychiatrist should aim at that which is essential and not avail able for exterior observation “we will feel with the patient and this will be an important element of our psychiatric judgment,” thereby coining the term diagnostique par péné ration (Minkowski 2002: 94). Rümke, in the controversial report, stated that the psych attic diagnosis is first formulated without the awareness of the psychiatrist relying on ele Bents that are different from the ones that he will later use to justify it (Rümke 1941). For Rümke the psychiatric diagnosis is based on non-observable data. He went as far as saying that the determination of symptoms and the diagnosis of schizophrenia was to be made through the Praecox Gefühl, a specific feeling experienced by the clinician when en countering a patient with schizophrenia. More recently it has been revisited by Rube who established the percentage of correct diagnosis relying on the Praecox Gefühl of 86. based on the ICD-10 and 83. according to the DSM-fourth. Doer-Zegers introduced the term Melancholia Gefühl, a feeling that affects the clinician when meeting a melancholic patient. Tellenbach developed the concept of atmospheric diagnosis. His conception of at mosphere is not along what is here presented, but the fact is that, similarly to his pride Lessors, he considered that during the (p. 877) encounter with a patient, the clinician is led to feel so-called atmospheric qualities perceptible in a bodily-sensuous way that per mate the process of diagnosing. In the therapeutic realm, Musalek has imported social aesthetics into the clinical encounter with the concept of healing atmospheres, which he conceives as spaces of possibilities. The same author, in conjunction with Schlimme, also introduced the term paranoid atmospheres, when referring to the atoms Wheres emerging in a deluded patient in their everyday interactions, which sustains the persistence and maintenance of the delusions.

These are examples of atmospheres and their portrayals in psychiatry as accessible phe novena capable of disclosing psychopathologic meaning. Permeating the interaction with the patient they aid in the diagnostic process and have therapeutic implications. We will focus on the first two in the next sections.

Atmospheric Affordances Some of the best-accomplished descriptions of atmospheres are found in psychiatric liter Mature. Conrad, when referring to delusional mood, depicts it as something “in the air” and compares it to the atmospheric experience of walking alone in the woods. “The intermedi ate space between the invisible and what lies behind... has lost its neutrality. It is not the tree, nor the bush we see, the rustle of the tree tops or the cry of the owl we hear, but rather everything that is hidden, the space from which the tree, the bush, the rustle and the cry stand out: the very darkness and what is hidden as such” ( Conrad 1963: 98; Mishara 2010 ). Jasper depicts the delusional atmosphere as follows: “the environment is somehow different—not to a gross degree—perception is unaltered in itself but there is some change which envelops everything with a subtle, pervasive and strangely uncertain light... with this delusional atmosphere we always find an objective something there, even though quite vague, a something which lays the seed of objective validity and mean Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter ing” (Jasper 1997: 98). In both descriptions, the atmosphere is disturbingly vague yet spatially present to the point of restricting our movements and ultimately our freedom. The fact that Conrad chose the example of the woods to illustrate part of the delusional mood demonstrates the openness of atmospheres to reflexive exercise and above all, its interpersonal objectivity. The experience of walking alone in the woods at night and the salience of that particular intermediate space set off feelings of disquiet and of being watched while walking, which are intersubjectively understood. Hence, the perception of atmospheres demands a special objectivity. We could therefore assume that situations, like walking in the woods, have certain atmospheric affordances —“ecological invites or meanings that are ontologically rooted in things or quasi-things” ( Griffero 2014: 51), which are relatively inter-observable and prone to repetition. This is the core of the relevance of atmospheres as significant psychiatric objects.

Diagnostic Atmospheres In the clinical encounter the most undefined bodily expressiveness of the patient, like a specific posture or a subtle fading of the prosody, are experienced in the lived space as at mospheres, in a precise and concrete fashion, before acquiring any intentional stance. For (p. 878) instance, when the depersonalized melancholic patient explains, “there is only emptiness around me” ( von Gebsattel 1954: 25), the emptiness is immediately and evi Gently perceived by the clinician not as an absence but as an emptiness that is present in a quasi-concrete way. Recently, Doer-Zegers and Stanghellini described their experience when meeting a schizophrenic patient as “a feeling of surmounting him. My lived body ex Bands... I become bigger and feel that I invade David [the patient]... But his not anti ng to look plus his standing bent and walking backwards does not produce in me that light sensation of nausea and repulsion we have in front of a stuporous depressive” ( Otto Doer-Zegers 2015: 4). Atmospheres are bodily resonant qualities of the lived space, man fest as affordances that build on the multimodal Censorial continuum of experience and guide our intuitive grasping of reality.

Schlitz structured the experience of space in three levels. The first level is the space of location ( ortsraum ), a geometric, measurable space. The second is the space of lived body directedness ( richtungsraum ) grounded in the motor suggestions of the surrounding space. The third level is the space of vastness ( weiteraum ), a non-measurable, non-dire tonal absolute space centered in the lived body, the unnoticed background space that es Forts our optokinetic movements. When direction begins to narrow the lived body’s vastness, the former two types of space arise. Atmospheres drift in the space of vastness. They are mostly elicited by the expressive attributes of a situ son as well as intermodal motion and rhythmic configurations with its harmonies and dis sonances that shape the space of vastness whilst being bodily experienced. Concerning the latter, Ligeti depicts them as “static, self-contained (music) without either develop Bent or traditional rhythmic configuration.” In his music, atmospheres arise through the use of different rhythms in simultaneity, which create a volumetric sound structure that retains the melody. Giacometti’s bronze sculptures L’Somme qui march and L’Somme du doigt or Rui Chafes’s iron sculptures like During Sleep illustrate the role of the expressive Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter qualities in atmospheric perception. They are made of heavy raw materials, yet they im mediately elicit the experience of lightness. It is the atmosphere that makes this determi nation possible. Hence, atmospheres are present in the genesis of our global awareness of situations. Just as in the theater “the first scenes directly instill in us a certain emotion, which orients our entire comprehension,” also in the clinical encounter it is not enough to identify symptoms, it is rather necessary that there be ascertained “a certain world-quail ty within which the problem or intrigue takes on meaning” ( Dufrenne 1973: 188).

Fragile Understanding Tarkovsky’s discontinuities as the eroded images of abandoned places, the irregularity of surfaces, the erratic presence of water and the loosened narrative, elicit all senses and engage the viewer in a construction of meaning that is grounded in direct experience. We propose a similar engagement in the clinical encounter. Pallasmaa developed the concept of fragile architecture, which advocates a shift from the visual to the haptic understand ing of architecture, relying on the whole Censorial experience. Through this new understanding he intends to replace “the feeling of external control and visual effect by a heightened sense of inferiority and tactile intimacy” ( McLeod 2013: 29). We suggest an analogous shift when assessing psychopathological phenomena, grounded on the clinician’s own pathic pre-reflective experiences, thereby coining the term fragile understanding.

(p. 879) In the Ellen West case, her mode of existence is described as alternating between flying or floating over the clouds in relation with periods of hope and crawling like a worm in phases of desperation. In The Waves by Virginia Wolf the au Thor writes “I am rooted but I flow... I stream like a plant in the river, flowing this way, flowing that way, but rooted” ( Woolf 2015: 59). These are examples of the relevance of the pre-reflective realm, particularly the lived body and space, in organizing experience.

As a means of organizing our fragile understanding of atmospheres we suggest that Blini sans rely mainly on the pre-reflective experiential realms, such as lived body and space, through which the expressive qualities in atmospheric perception, could for instance be described as expanding, retracting, being light or heavy, empty or full, floating, undulant ing or flat, etc. The phenomenological descriptions of these domains of experience carry the seed for interpersonal objectivity and the awareness of prototypic atmospheres to be disclosed. Hopefully, the intimate experience of atmospheres will also add empathic quail ties to the encounter, having further implications in the therapeutic realm, like the strengthening and the unveiling of possibilities in the doctor-patient relationship.

Atmospheres and the Clinical Encounter # Conclusion In this chapter we have attempted to clarify the intermediate ontological status of atoms Wheres. We have acknowledged them as immediately and directly perceived phenomena, which precede any cognitive attribution, whilst guiding our intuitive grasping of reality. In the particular setting of the clinical interview we have noticed their presence as phenom ena, from which the encounter, and also the process of diagnosis, take on meaning. Al though they certainly belong to the pre-reflective realm of experience, their openness to reflective exercise is manifest in the vast lexicon used to describe them. This has led us to recognize their inter-observability and proneness to repetition. Our final assertion is that these particular features account for an understanding that engages the clinician as an active participant in the delicate process of meaning making, which we coined fragile un derstanding, relying essentially on two distinctive domains of the pre-reflexive experience —lived space and lived body. Hopefully, the training of psychiatrists in this kind of under standing may have implications in the diagnostic realm, and in the therapeutic realm, namely by reinforcing the patient-doctor empathic relationship. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK This article presents a holistic conception of psychopathy inspired by phenomenological psychopathology and compares it with the mainstream nosographic diagnosis (Schneider, Cleckley, Hare, and Cooke). The article illustrates how a structural-phenomenological ap roach enhances the investigation of psychopathy. An epistemological discussion of the concept of emotions reveals that psychopaths are competent at managing emotional sim uli, which bestows a psychological advantage upon them. More specifically, a reflection enlightened by the contributions of phenomenological philosophy on empathy and sympa thy clarifies the presentation of “psychopathic being-in-the-world.” Starting with the ten ion between clinical practice and criticism of the dominant diagnostic scales, this article considers the “essential characteristics” of the psychopathic disorder to be: reification of the alter ego without an ego-related disorder, emotional coldness as it provides adaptive benefits, and empathic skills without sympathy.

Keywords: psychopathy, emotion, empathy, sympathy, phenomenological psychopathology, adaptation # Introduction THE objective of this article is to present a holistic conception of psychopathy inspired by phenomenological psychopathology and to compare it with the mainstream nosographic diagnosis. First, two major theoretical works dedicated to this nosographic entity are dis cussed. One is German: Schneider’s Psychopathic Personalities. The other is American: Cleckley’s The Mask of Sanity. The well-known work of Hare is then summarized, including the so-called Hare Psychopathy Check list (PCL-R), as well as the critique by Cooke et al..

Next, I illustrate how a structural-phenomenological approach enhances the psychopath logical investigation of psychopathy. I first compare Binswanger’s conception of mania with psychopathic functioning. Patients’ behavior is similar but the difference relates to The Psychopathology of Psychopaths the dialectic between the ego and the alter ego. A patient with mania is affected by a fun damental crisis of the ego, which a psychopath does not have. A second dimension relates to emotions and the adaptive dimension of psychopathy. An epistemological discussion of the concept of emotions reveals that psychopaths are competent at managing emotional stimuli, which bestows a psychological advantage upon them. Finally, a reflection Penlight need by the contributions of phenomenological philosophy (Stein 1989; Schemer 2008; Za have 2005, 2011 ) on empathy and sympathy clarifies the presentation of “psychopathic be ing-in-the-world.” Starting with the tension between clinical practice and criticism of the dominant diagnostic scales, we consider the “essential characteristics” of the psychopath ic disorder to be: reification of the alter ego without an ego-related disorder, emotional coldness as it provides adaptive benefits, and empathic skills without sympathy.

(p. 883) Phenomenological Psychopathology of Psy # chopathy?

As a discipline, the purpose of phenomenological psychopathology is to identify the Yogi cal structure of psychological functioning; it favors an approach based on understanding over interpretation or explanation. One of its aims is to identify the specific psychological features inherent to nosographic ens ties (the dimension of eidetic phenomenology which focuses on the study of essences and identification of the basic components of phenomena—in the specific field of phenomena logical psychopathology, we speak about specific being-in-the-world ). This method partly derives from Minkowski’s legacy, who suggested engaging in a “psychology of the pathological” rather than a “pathology of the psychological,” that is, seeking a structural understanding of psychological organization. This approach to psychopatholo gy is intrinsically clinical; the fundamentals of its research topics—phenomena—emerge from clinical practice. This theoretical essay is informed by clinical situations involving psychopaths who were interviewed in prison or in forensic centers.

If phenomenological psychopathology is interested, largely, in psychotic issues, many studies do analyze other psychopathological disorders and psychopathological manifest sons. Work on the consideration of psychopathy in a phenomenology cal paradigm, as far as it is concerned, is recent. These studies are particularly interested in the subject’s experiential dimension of time and show deficits in the imagination of the future and massive deficits with respect to mental time travel. Let’s also mention the amazing approach of philosopher Glover at Broadmoor high-security psychiatric hospital, in England, which analyzes the moral and ethical dilemmas of the psychopathic subjects he went to meet (along with other di agnoses). If they observe cognitive and moral bias in their speech, Glover’s hypothesis is precisely to consider that such biases are in parallel to those seen in many people consed red normal. Finally, let’s notice that the work of phenomenological psy The Psychopathology of Psychopaths chopathology centered on psychopathy also discusses the emotional dimension of this dis order.

Strictly speaking, psychopathy or “psychopathic personality” is not a medical/psychiatric diagnosis. As we shall see, the psychopath is in fact absent from domineering nosography as in the DSM or ICD. However, this diagnosis is of considerable importance in many con temporary debates on psychopathology because of its many clinical and societal issues. Important links are identified between the psychopathic trait and other disorders such as antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality, and schizophrenia. From a developmental point of view, many studies underline connections between certain psychological Visor Hers of childhood and adolescence (including Callous-unemotional line) and the develop Bent of psychopathic characteristics into adulthood (Bird and Aiding 2014; Rick et al. 2014; Henry et al. (p. 884) 2016; Muratori et al. 2016 ). Finally, a clarification of psychopa thy is very important for the forensic field and for the psychopathological reflection on criminal matters.

Historical and Contemporary Nosographies Historical Background Psychopathy was described in the early nineteenth century by Panel. He observed that 1 some subjects presented a state of “ Janie sans délire ” [insanity without delusion] (Panel 1800: 151). This early description is very important as it will enable us to explain the problem inherent to modern conceptions of psychopathy. The work of Schneider and Cleckley gradually led to a common and still current definition of psychopathy: a serious disorder or imbalance of the character or personality that does not include psychosis or significant mental deficiency.

In contemporary nosographic work, psychopathy occupies an ambiguous position. This uncertainty is reflected in its absence from the DSM-fourth and DSM-5 and from the ICD-10 and future ICD-11.

According to Schneider (1923 ), psychopaths present antisocial manifestations and char cater disorders such as instability, irritability, inability to adapt, increased tendency to commit crimes and consume drugs and alcohol, etc. In addition, psychopathy is said to be characterized by a firm opposition to social rules and norms (see Table 82.1). Cleckley identifies sixteen key signs that tend to describe a typical psychopath. This is an individual who is characterized by superficial charm and high intelligence, who does not suffer from delusions or irrational thinking, but also does not present signs of neurosis, guilt or shame. Lacking in insight and presenting emotional reactions described as poor, a psychopath is also unable to behave appropriately in interpersonal relations. Hypocritical and untruthful, egocentric and incapable of love, this is a person who cannot be counted on, is unable to learn from experience, or follow a life plan. Finally, in addition to engage The Psychopathology of Psychopaths ing in inadequately motivated antisocial behavior, a psychopath demonstrates fantastic and objectionable behavior under the influence of alcohol, has an impersonal and trivial sex life, and is unlikely to attempt suicide (see Table 82.1).

The Hare Psychopathy Checklist—Revised Despite the lack of a definition in the international classifications, an important move Bent in the literature attempted to formulate a pragmatic definition of psychopathy, based on (p. 885) the work of Hare. The Hare Psychopathy Checklist—Revised (PCL-R) presents a set of behavioral, interpersonal, and Effective characteristics, include ing egocentricity; manipulation; insensitivity to others; irresponsibility; unstable relation ships; impulsivity; lack of empathy, remorse or guilt; and poor behavioral control. All of the PCL-R items is presented in a summary table below (see Table 83.1). These signs are most likely to manifest in antisocial behavior. These anti social characteristics are part of the clinical picture, but they are not sufficient to jag nose psychopathy: a psychopathic subject necessarily has an antisocial personality, but the opposite is not necessarily true. Ac cording to this conception, one might consider psychopathic personality to be a way of adapting to the world through Effective and interpersonal experiences, whereas the antisocial dimension is primarily a set of behaviors involving trans gressions against social laws and standards.

This work adds a specific set of items to the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder in order to isolate psychopathy as a specific nosographic entity. These items mainly concern the interpersonal sphere and the Effective dimension.

The Psychopathology of Psychopaths Table 83. Summary of criteria for psychopathy Schneider’s criteria Cleckley’s criteria Hare’s criteria Schneider’s criteria Cleckley’s criteria Hare’s criteria Antisocial manifest Superficial charm and Glibness and/or sons high intelligence superficial charm Instability Does not suffer from Grandiose sense Irritability delusions or irra of self-worth Inability to adapt tonal thinking Need for stimuli Tendency to commit Does not present son and/or crimes signs of neurosis, proneness to Drugs and alcohol guilt, or shame boredom consumption Lacking in insight Pathological lying Characterized by a Emotional reactions Conning and/or firm opposition to so described as poor manipulative Dial rules and norms Unable to behave ap Lack of remorse propriately in inter or guilt personal relations Shallow affect Hypocritical and un Callous and/or truthful lack of empathy Egocentric and Inca Parasitic lifestyle able of love Poor behavioral This is a person who controls cannot be counted on Promiscuous sex Unable to learn from ual behavior experience or follow a Early behavior life plan problems Engaging in invade Lack of realistic, quately motivated an long-term goals tisocial behavior Impulsivity Demonstrates object Irresponsibility tionable behavior un Failure to accept der the influence of responsibility for alcohol own actions Has an impersonal Many short-term and trivial sex life marital relation Is unlikely to attempt ships suicide Juvenile deli quench Revocation of conditional re lease The Psychopathology of Psychopaths Criminal versatile ty (p. 886)

Other Instruments I should make it clear that my goal is not to present a comprehensive examination of all contemporary models of psychopathy. I will only include the presentation of three other instruments: the Psychopathic Personality Inventory, the Triarchic Psychopathy Model and the Self-Report of Psychopathy–Short Form. The former was revised in 2005 to become the PPI-R and now comprises 154 items organized into eight subscales. The items are grouped into two overarching and largely separate factors (Factor 1—Fearless dominance: Social influence, Fearlessness, Stress im unity; Factor 2—Impulsive antisociality: Machiavellian egocentricity, Rebellious noncom formity, Blame externalization, Carefree nonplanfulness), plus a third factor that is mainly dependent on scores on the other two (Cold-heartedness).

Meanwhile, the Triarchic model suggests that different conceptions of psychopathy emphasize three observable characteristics to varying degrees: boldness (low fear including stress-tolerance, toleration of unfamiliarity and danger, and high selfconfidence and social assertiveness), disinhibition (poor impulse control, including prob ems with planning and foresight, lacking affect and urge control, demand for immediate gratification, and poor behavioral restraints), and meanness (Lacking empathy and close attachments with others, disdain of close attachments, use of cruelty to gain empower Bent, exploitative tendencies, defiance of authority, and destructive excitement seeking).

Finally, the Self-Report of Psychopathy–Short Form (SRP-SF). Derived from and shown to correlate highly with the PCL, the SRP was developed for use in nonforensic populations as a practical and brief method to assess psychopathic traits. The latest version of this scale contains twenty-nine items and may provide an efficient method of measuring psychopathic traits among larger samples. The items are grouped into four dimensions of psychopathy: Effective callousness, inter personal manipulation, antisociality, and erratic lifestyle.

Despite the interest of these tools, I formulate my critical discussion on the basis of the PCL-R alone, as it remains the reference tool in criminological and psychopathological as sessments in the field of forensics. I also specify that none of these tools falls within the scope of psychopathological phenomenology. Let’s now discuss Cooke et al.’s criticism of the PCL-R’s factor structure, and particularly the presence of antisocial characteristics in the diagnosis of psychopathy (this critique is also not made from a phenomenological point of view).

The Psychopathology of Psychopaths Critique of the Presence of an Antisocial Dimension Cooke et al.’s work stimulated a lively debate on whether antisocial behaviors are or are not necessary in characterizing a subject as a psychopath. This ambiguity already existed in the work of Schneider and Cleckley. However, Cleckley was the researcher who most clearly considered the possibility of a diagnosis of psychopathy without the presence of antisocial or illegal behavior.

(p. 887) The Comprehensive Assessment of Psychopathic Personality (CAPP) supports a different premise for defining the psychopathic entity. This conception, which has also been strongly influenced by Cleckley’s work, is a multidimensional model of personality that consists in six dime ions and includes each of the dysfunctional traits observed in psychopathic personality disorder, except for the antisocial factor (and those related to sexual promiscuity and short-term cohabitation relationships in the PCL-R). These authors consider the antisocial factor as “secondary symptoms,” which follow from the psychopathic lifestyle. Thus, the model excludes the elements related to the subject’s behavioral and criminal history. Ac cording to this criticism, the interpersonal and Effective facets are the “central con stituents” of the psychopathic personality.

These developments are very important and allow one to go one step further in under standing the psychopathic individual’s psychology, but they still seem to stop short of one crucial step: carrying out an in-depth psychopathological study of psychopathy. I forum late my critical discussion on the basis of the PCL-R alone, as it remains the reference tool in criminological and psychopathological assessments in the field of forensics.

For a Psychopathological Approach of Psy # chopathy My objective is to seek out the meaning structure and the signification that links different signs of the disorder. According to Jasper’s proposal, the purpose in psy chopathology is to understand the puzzle that is presented, observe the phenomena, and seek to obtain a significant overall picture. The starting point I suggest, paradoxically, is to examine manic being-in-the-world.

Mad? The Dialectics of Ego and Alter Ego in Psychopaths and Manic Subjects Ludwig Binswanger conducted a systematic analysis of the “reification of the alter ego” in manic subjects. One of the fundamental characteristics of mania, in this author’s view, is seeing other people as “interchangeable” and “utilitarian.” Although Binswanger does not address this question, we can make an analogy with psychopathic functioning, which also presents this tendency to reify others. Psychopathic patients may say, for ex The Psychopathology of Psychopaths ample: “The others are objects I use when I need them; in my eyes, they are no more”; “What counts for me is the pleasure I get from what I’m doing; the role of other people isn’t very important”; “I wanted to carry out a successful robbery and no one was going to stop me. To succeed, I had to kill him. He din’t represent anything more than an obsta cle to me” [Source: own clinical experience].

Clearly, though, from a clinical perspective, mania and psychopathy are very different phenomena. In what ways? When Panel describes psychopathic behavior as “ Janie sans délire,” it is important to define what is meant by “madness.” The work of Binswanger suggests “the constitution of the alter ego” and “the ego” as a basis for discussing the 2 dysfunctions (p. 888) of manic being-in-the-world. His thesis is that, in manic subjects, a disorder affecting the constitution of the alter ego coexists with a Visor der of the constitution of the ego, or I: If in mania the alter ego is not completely constituted, and thus remains largely a stranger, or even a strange thing—a mere object taken, pushed aside and rejected, used and consumed by something—then the causes are naturally not in the alter ego but in the ego.

(Binswanger 1960: 93; my translation)

This observation is critical since it presents mania as a subclass of psychosis, which Bin swinger considers, based on Husserl’s work, as a failure of “appresentation” [Ppräsensation]. When two people meet, “what is present to us is dif ferment but is accompanied by the same appresentation” ( Binswanger 1960: 75). These two people share a set of common representations that allow them to consider each other as an alter ego and to share a common world. Thus, in Binswanger’s understanding of the term, appresentation is an intersubjective, intuitive, and pre-cognitive phenomenon that enables one to form relationships and that must necessarily be shared by the various partners. This a prior is crucial for the sharing of common meaning and natural self-evi Fence in social exchanges. It is precisely this faculty that is said to be deficient in psy chaotic pathologies (including mania).

Binswanger cites the example of one of his manic patients, Elsa Strauss, who entered a church and interrupted the ceremony to compliment the pianist and ask him for private lessons, offending the whole congregation. Words and actions, taken out of context, are not fundamentally incoherent or delirious, but they show a “failure of appresentation in mania and... the impossibility of constituting a common world” ( Binswanger 1960: 78). The essence of psychosis in Binswanger’s view is to escape this implicit common apple sensation. This thesis can be superimposed on modern concepts of psychosis according to phenomenological psychopathology. For Binswanger, the manic reification of the other and the problem affecting the alter ego can be situated in a disorder affecting a psychotic ego. The determining factor in discrim inating between manic and psychopathic subjects is at this level: the former have a Visor The Psychopathology of Psychopaths der of the constitution of the alter ego explained by a disorder of the ego, while the latter have the same disorder but with an intact ego.

The Core Characteristic of Psychopathy: Reification of Others With out an Ego-Related Disorder The major difference between manic and psychopathic reification of the other is clearly identifiable by clinicians. For manic patients, other people are just a casual means of im plementing their own projects, of enjoying themselves or their grandiosity. Their instr mentalization of others is direct, clearly pre-reflexive, even “naïve.”

They do not even try to imagine what goes on in other people’s minds, because this does not play a role in their projects. Their empathetic awareness of other people is non-xis tent (p. 889) (however, they can also be exquisitely sensitive to the emotions of others and can feel responsible—in a grandiose way—for all of their suffering). In contrast, for psy chopaths, other people are a means of gaining power and pursuing their goals in a cold, insidious way. Their instrumentalization of others has a reflective, well-thought-out com potent, which is somewhat “Machiavellian.” They may well use imagination and “theory of mind” in order to deceive, lie, and misuse others to achieve their own ends.

Thanks to Binswanger’s analysis of the crisis of the ego and the alter ego, we can refine this description. The radical and fundamental difference between manic and psychopath ic subjects is that the latter do not present problems with the ego or I; to put it more sim ply, they do not have psychotic symptoms. A psychopath presents a disorder affecting the alter ego, via the reification of others (a symptom shared with manic subjects) but with out presenting an ego-related disorder (a symptom not shared with manic subjects). Un like a manic subject, a psychopath is able to maintain a stable ego and a coherent identity while still reifying others. For the psychopath, the alter ego problem is not secondary to a problem with the ego in its function as an appresentative structure.

Now let us reconsider the twenty items of the PCL-R. Based on the recommendations of the CAPP, I eliminate the socalled secondary items, which are less relevant to a psychopathological approach. The re Gaining thirteen items are as follows: 1. Glibness and/or superficial charm; 2. Grandiose sense of self-worth; 3. Need for stimulation and/or proneness to boredom; 4. Pathological lying; 5. Conning and/or manipulative; 6. Lack of remorse or guilt; 7. Shallow affect; 8. Callous and/or lack of empathy; 9. Parasitic lifestyle; 13. Lack of realistic, long-term goals; 14. Impulsivity; 15. Irresponsibility; 16. Failure to accept responsibility for own actions.

The semiological picture presented above describes manic subjects just as well as psy chopaths. Needless to say, I don’t think these two diagnostic entities are the same. Be cause it limits its analyses to a survey of interpersonal and Effective dimensions consed red as isolable signs, and does not provide a structural and psychopathological synth sis, this model is unable to explain the difference between mania and psychopathy.

The Psychopathology of Psychopaths Still, in the light of Panel’s proposal to consider psychopathy as “insanity without deli ion” [“ Janie sans délire ”], we should not be surprised by this finding. The overview of Binswanger’s work highlighted that the difference between mania and psychopathy is lo acted not really at the level of strictly behavioral signs but at the psychopathological lev el, based on the essential dialectic between the alter ego and the ego. Hence the decisive affiliation of mania with psychosis and not that of psychopathy. The latter should be con sidered a personality disorder. This allows us to remember that, of course, these two dis orders are fundamentally and essentially different from a psychopathological point of view and with regard to their respective mode of being-in-the-world.

Adapted? Is Psychopathy a Generalized Maladaptation?

One of the problems in understanding psychopathy may be to immediately consider it as a disorder, without further thought, and thus viewing it a prior as a maladaptation. For evolutionary psychopathology (De Block and Adriaens 2011; Brine 2008; McGuire and Troisi 1998; Stevens and Price 2000; Demaret 2014), many behaviors considered to be pathological must have an adaptive value in the original environment in (p. 890) which the morphology and psychology of our species were shaped. A change in time (a behavior in another era) or space (a behavior in another context, or social, cultural. or economic situation) may make a symptom appear adaptive (e.g. anorexia nervosa in times of famine). Regarding psychopathy, one might suggest that: The social function of psychopaths depends on conditions in the environment. In times of peace, we lock them up; in times of war, we count on them and cover them with medals.

(Demaret 2014: 29; my translation)

Classically, psychopathy is associated with a general or specific emotional deficit, affecting the processing and production of emotion. Basic research tends to partially disconfirm this hypothesis. Al though the emotional dimension is considered to be the basis for the process of adapt son and social interaction and is assumed to have a regulating function, the hypothesis that psychopaths have an emotional deficit is contradictory. I suggest instead that psychopaths are able to understand and manage emotional phenomena. This conception is in opposition to the “poor,” “narrow,” and “im mature” emotional life attributed to psychopaths. It corresponds to the adaptive conception considered by Demaret. In times of war, the psychopath does not suddenly regain the emotional competence he had lost in times of peace.

The Psychopathology of Psychopaths Emotional Coldness “Emotional coldness” must be distinguished from “emotional deficit.” Emotional coldness, if we can agree on a definition, is clearly one of the fundamental clinical signs of psy chopathy. Hare (2003 ) defines emotional coldness as one of the four facets of psychopa thy (and thus an essential trait). I agree with this claim. He then defines it with four items: Lack of remorse or guilt (item 6), Shallow affect (item 7), Callous and/or lack of em Cathy (item 8) and Failure to accept responsibility for own actions (item 16). This second point is not satisfactory because Hare’s definition does not perfectly delimit the concept. Emotional coldness should instead be considered a way of managing emotional manifest sons calmly and coolly, without precipitation. (This is difficult to relate to item 14 of the PCL-R, “impulsivity,” which describes antisocial subjects but not true psychopaths, strict ly speaking.) Emotional coldness is a preferred method of managing emotion calmly and keeping some distance, as well as a tendency to take the time to analyze emotional exp riences triggered in oneself or in others. This tendency should not be considered as being more or less adaptive, effective, or pathological than a “warm” emotion management style (tendency to react faster, by trial and error, “naturally,” or “romantically”). It is probably more profitable to have a preferred method (a style) of emotion management than to manage emotion in a more random, less coherent way. Depending on an individual’s social, relational, or professional situation, it may be more adaptive to man age emotions either “coldly” (political leader, emergency physician, etc.) or “warmly” (group facilitator, performing artist, etc.). This means that the emotional cold Bess generally attributed to psychopaths may be considered partly as an adaptive (p. 891) advantage, which can also be found in numerous people who have no personality Visor Hers or social or emotional deficits.

Bad? Empathy or Sympathy Disorder?

Psychopaths are generally said to have an empathy deficit. Once again, it is necessary to define this concept. If we examine the definition more closely, we can see that a psychopath does not actually have an empathy disorder but a sympathy disorder. This difference is crucial as it enables us to distinguish between psychopathy (sympathy disorder) and schizophrenia (empathy disorder).

The concept of empathy is evoked so often that researchers often forget to define and an alyze it. Some researchers with philosophical background point out that empathy is act ally a phenomenon that is very difficult to delimit, and when closely examined, complicit ed to define. The most widely accepted de finition can be summarized in this way: it is the psychological mechanism whereby an in dividual manages to intuitively represent another person’s emotional experience or suf Bering. In this definition, the concept of empathy does not consider the subject’s response to this representation. It is therefore a “representational ability” that allows for “under standing of others.” It can be differentiated from sympathy, the object of which is other people’s well-being. Empathy is resat The Psychopathology of Psychopaths ed to intuitive, implicit understanding and knowledge. Sympathy involves compassion and attention to others’ well-being.

Empathetic knowledge is not “intellectual.” Rather, it is a kind of intuitive, implicit knoll edge that arises immediately when we meet another person. This is a primary form of in tersubjectivity based on bodily expression and intercorporeality. This “implicit empathy” underlies social exchanges. In addition to this pre-re flexive tendency, psychopathologists develop a method of understanding other people’s experiences. This “conative empathy” is a reflexive and explicit practice used to promote the development of intersubjectivity between the clinician and the patient. We can distin gush between two “kinds” of empathy: the clinician’s (conative and explicit) and the patient’s (implicit).

The investigation of implicit empathy needs to go into more depth in the case of psy chopathy. A disorder affecting empathy (considered as the faculty of representing other people’s experiences at the emotional, sentimental, or cognitive level) leads to a diagno sis of schizophrenia, rather than psychopathy. From this point of view, we must formally reconsider the hypothesis that psychopaths are affected by an empathy deficiency. On the other hand, it seems very possible that they have a “sympathy disorder.” A psychopath has no difficulty identifying other people’s feelings and experiences (unlike a person with schizophrenia), but he finds them completely irrelevant, as is other people’s well-being. The analysis of other people and their experiences is strictly utilitarian and is unrelated to concern for or attention to their well-being. For example, a psychopath can describe his victims’ suffering (showing evidence of empathy) but can coldly explain that they are of no importance to him (he feels no sympathy). Generally, psychopaths know that other people are bundles of emotions but they never “lose themselves” in this Effective expert Once. A psychopathic rapist said about his victims: “What do you want me to say? That won’t change anything for them. Maybe it dissociative identity disorder hurt them, but how do you expect that to change things for me?... What I think now (p. 892) won’t change anything about their sit Cations or mine”; “I can well understand when other people want to express their feelings but it’s got nothing to do with me. What other people feel isn’t important to me” [Source: own clinical experience]. This sympathy disorder, which takes the form of being able to imagine other people’s emotional experiences without being affected by them, may obi ously overlap with the emotional coldness discussed above.

This new way of considering psychopathic affectivity has an impact on clinical practice but also on the field of research. The relationship the psychopath has with emotions should not be considered a mere deficit but, from a certain point of view, an individualistic adaptive advantage. Discrimination between empathy (psychopathic competence) and sympathy (not a psychopathic skill) points out some weaknesses in jag Gnostic tools such as scale Hare, but also, for example, allows to reconsider an expanding field of study such as the dimensions of Callous-unemotional traits in Hindi visuals at risk of developing a psychopathic personality, especially among adolescents. The pro posals developed in this article may suggest that the unemotional intrinsic dimension The Psychopathology of Psychopaths should be discussed again through a complex consideration and take into account the dis crimination between emotional understanding of others (empathy) and emotional re spouse to them (sympathy).

Conclusion The purpose of this article was to examine psychopathy and the classical approaches to evaluating it through the lens of phenomenological psychopathology. Despite some behave oral similarities, the psychopathological analysis allowed us to distinguish between ma nia and psychopathy, to restore to psychopathy the emotional competence it had been considered not to have, and to differentiate between empathy and sympathy. The adaptive qualities that have been preserved, consistently with the mastery of empathy, do not pre Elude a moral disorder via the loss of sympathy for other people. Finally, this phenomena logical study enabled us to identify a fundamental structural characteristic of psychopa thy, namely the ability to reify other people and to keep one’s own ego intact.

The tools of phenomenological psychopathology gave us the means to identify the strum Curing and characteristic elements of psychopathic functioning and to point out the short comings of contemporary nosographies and theories related to this specific entity. Resort ing to structural-phenomenological methods proved essential for not reducing this conj son to a mere maladaptation or to an (emotional) deficit, and to try to understand the be ing-in-the-world of these particular patients. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Notes: 1 ( ) The traditional English translation is certainly not the best since it translates the word “Janie ” [mania] with “insanity” as in French we mean by the word “ folic.” For our pur poses we will retain the notion of mania to be able to dialogue with the theses of Bin swinger on the manic state and to refine our critique of the scale of Hare (see section on “Mad?: The Dialectics of Ego and Alter Ego in Psychopaths and Manic Subjects”).

The Psychopathology of Psychopaths 2 ( ) For an overview of the concept of being-in-the-world, refer to selected papers of Lud wig Binswanger and for a presentation of the manic mode of being-in-the-world, see Brooke et al. (2013: 197–203).

Jérôme Englebert Department of Psychology, University of Liège The Psychopathology of Psychopaths 2 ( ) For an overview of the concept of being-in-the-world, refer to selected papers of Lud wig Binswanger and for a presentation of the manic mode of being-in-the-world, see Brooke et al. (2013: 197–203).

Jérôme Englebert Department of Psychology, University of Liège A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethic cal Perspective on Emotional Trauma Robert D. Stolorow The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords After a brief overview of the author’s phenomenological-contextualist psychoanalytic per spective, the article traces the evolution of the author’s conception of emotional trauma over the course of three decades, as it developed in concert with his efforts to grasp his own traumatized states and his studies of existential philosophy. The author illuminates two of trauma’s essential features: its context-embeddedness, and its existential significance. The article also describes the impact of trauma on the phenomenology of time and the sense of alienation from others that accompanies traumatic temporality. The author contends that the proper therapeutic comportment toward trauma is a form of emotional dwelling. He concludes with a discussion of the implications of all these forum Cations for the development of an ethics of finitude.

Keywords: psychoanalysis, trauma, existentialism, phenomenology, temporality, ethics of finitude # Phenomenological Contextualism BEFORE I turn to trauma proper, I offer a very brief overview of the theoretical lens through which I have sought to grasp its essential features over the course of some three decades. Intersubjective-systems theory, the name of my collaborators’ and my psychoanalytic perspective, is a phenomenological contextual ism. It is phenomenological in that it investigates and illuminates worlds of emotional ex perience and the structures that organize them. It is contextual in that it holds that such structures take form, both developmentally and in the therapeutic situation, in constitu Dive relational or intersubjective contexts. Recurring patterns of intersubjective transact son within the developmental system give rise to principles (thematic patterns, meaningstructures, cognitive-Effective schemes) that unconsciously organize subsequent emotion al and relational experiences. Such organizing principles are unconscious, not in the sense of being repressed, but in being pre-reflective; they ordinarily do not enter the do main of reflective self-awareness. These intersubjectively derived, pre-reflective organic A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma ing principles are the basic building blocks of personality development, and their totality constitutes one’s character. Psychoanalytic therapy is a dialogical method for bringing this pre-reflective organizing activity into reflective self-awareness, particularly as it shows up within the therapeutic relationship.

Trauma’s Context-Embeddedness Early contexts of emotional trauma are a particularly important source of pre-reflective organizing principles. Nowhere is the context dependence of emotional life more vividly (p. 897) exemplified than in the phenomenon of emotional trauma. The explication of trauma’s context dependence was foreshadowed in a sentence that my late wife Daphne (Bede) composed in our early joint article (Socarides and Stolorow 1984/1985 ): “The ten ency for [painful] Effective experiences to create a disorganized (i.e. traumatic) self-state is seen to originate from... faulty [affect] attunement, with a lack of mutual sharing and acceptance of affect states”. However, it was not until the aftermath of Bede’s death in February 1991, when I experienced first-hand what I later came to call the un bearable embeddedness of being, that I turned my attention to trauma’s context-embeddedness. The result was my chapter on emotional trauma in Contexts of Being, the book that George Atwood and I out lined the summer after Bede died.

I claimed in that chapter that emotional trauma is an experience of unendurable emotion al pain and, further, that the unbearability of emotional suffering cannot be explained solely, or even primarily, on the basis of the intensity of the painful feelings evoked by an injurious event. Painful emotional states become unbearable when they cannot find a con text of emotional understanding—what I came to call a relational home—in which they can be shared and held. Severe emotional pain that has to be experienced alone becomes lastingly traumatic and usually succumbs to some form of emotional numbing. In con toast, painful feelings that are held in a context of human understanding can gradually be come more bearable.

Drawing on the work of Baling, Ferenczi, Kohut, Krystal, and Winnicott, I contended that developmental trauma, in particular, must not be viewed as an instinctual flooding of an ill-equipped mental apparatus, as Freud would have it. Rather, developmental trauma was grasped as originating within a Korma Dive intersubjective context whose central feature is malattunement to painful affect—a breakdown of the child–caregiver inter-Effective system, leading to the child’s loss of af Sect-integrating capacity and thereby to an unbearable, overwhelmed, disorganized state. Painful or frightening affect becomes traumatic when the attunement that the child needs to assist in his or her tolerance and integration is profoundly absent. Such claims hold, Kari pass, for adult-onset trauma as well. Finding a relational home for the pain of a traumatic loss may be particularly difficult. When Bede died, the person whom I would have longed to share in and hold my overwhelming grief was of course the very same person who was gone.

A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma From the claim that developmental trauma is constituted in an intersubjective context wherein severe emotional pain cannot find a relational home in which it can be held, it follows that injurious childhood experiences in and of themselves need not be traumatic (or at least not lastingly so) or pathogenic, provided that they occur within a responsive milieu. Pain is not pathology. It is the absence of adequate attunement to the child’s painful emotional reactions that renders them unendurable and thus a source of trauma ic states and psychopathology. This conceptualization holds both for discrete, dramatic traumatic events and the more subtle “cumulative traumas” that occur con tinually throughout childhood.

One consequence of developmental trauma, relationally conceived, is that affect states take on enduring, crushing meanings (pre-reflective organizing activity). From recurring experiences of malattunement, the child acquires the unconscious conviction that unmet developmental yearnings and reactive painful feeling states are manifestations of a loath some defect or of an inherent inner badness. A defensive self-ideal is often established, representing a self-image purified of the offending affect states that were perceived (p. 898) to be unwelcome or damaging to caregivers. Living up to this Effectively purified ideal becomes a central requirement for maintaining harmonious ties to others and for upholding self-esteem. Thereafter, the emergence of prohibited affect is experienced as a failure to embody the required ideal, an exposure of the underlying essential defective Bess or badness, and is accompanied by feelings of isolation, shame, and self-loathing. In psychoanalytic therapy, qualities or activities of the therapist that lend themselves to be ing interpreted according to such unconscious meanings of affect confirm the patient’s expectations that emerging feeling states will be met with disgust, disdain, disinterest, alarm, hostility, withdrawal, exploitation, and the like, or will damage the therapist and destroy the therapeutic bond. Such transference expectations, unwittingly confirmed by the therapist, are a powerful source of resistance to the experience and articulation of af Sect. Intractable repetitive transference and resistances can be grasped, from this per spective, as rigidly stable states of the patient–therapist system, in which the meanings of the therapist’s stance have become tightly coordinated with the patient’s grim expect sons and fears, thereby exposing the patient repeatedly to threats of retraumatization. The focus on affect and its meanings contextualizes both transference and resistance, and it is essential for the progress of therapy that such expectations and fears be carefully and repeatedly investigated.

A second consequence of developmental trauma is a severe constriction and narrowing of the horizons of emotional experiencing (Stolorow, Atwood, and Orange 2002: chapter 3), so as to exclude whatever feels unacceptable, intolerable, or too dangerous in particular intersubjective contexts. When a child’s emotional experiences are consistently not re sponged to or are actively rejected, the child perceives that aspects of his or her Effective life are intolerable to the caregiver. These regions of the child’s emotional world must then be sacrificed in order to safeguard the needed tie. Repression was grasped here as a kind of negative organizing principle, always embedded in ongoing intersubjective con texts, determining which configurations of Effective experience are not to be allowed to come into full being. For example, when the act of linguistically articulating an Effective One consequence of developmental trauma, relationally conceived, is that affect states take on enduring, crushing meanings (pre-reflective organizing activity). From recurring experiences of malattunement, the child acquires the unconscious conviction that unmet developmental yearnings and reactive painful feeling states are manifestations of a loath some defect or of an inherent inner badness. A defensive self-ideal is often established, representing a self-image purified of the offending affect states that were perceived (p. 898) to be unwelcome or damaging to caregivers. Living up to this Effectively purified ideal becomes a central requirement for maintaining harmonious ties to others and for upholding self-esteem. Thereafter, the emergence of prohibited affect is experienced as a failure to embody the required ideal, an exposure of the underlying essential defective Bess or badness, and is accompanied by feelings of isolation, shame, and self-loathing. In psychoanalytic therapy, qualities or activities of the therapist that lend themselves to be ing interpreted according to such unconscious meanings of affect confirm the patient’s expectations that emerging feeling states will be met with disgust, disdain, disinterest, alarm, hostility, withdrawal, exploitation, and the like, or will damage the therapist and destroy the therapeutic bond. Such transference expectations, unwittingly confirmed by the therapist, are a powerful source of resistance to the experience and articulation of af Sect. Intractable repetitive transference and resistances can be grasped, from this per spective, as rigidly stable states of the patient–therapist system, in which the meanings of the therapist’s stance have become tightly coordinated with the patient’s grim expect sons and fears, thereby exposing the patient repeatedly to threats of retraumatization. The focus on affect and its meanings contextualizes both transference and resistance, and it is essential for the progress of therapy that such expectations and fears be carefully and repeatedly investigated.

A second consequence of developmental trauma is a severe constriction and narrowing of the horizons of emotional experiencing (Stolorow, Atwood, and Orange 2002: chapter 3), so as to exclude whatever feels unacceptable, intolerable, or too dangerous in particular intersubjective contexts. When a child’s emotional experiences are consistently not re sponged to or are actively rejected, the child perceives that aspects of his or her Effective life are intolerable to the caregiver. These regions of the child’s emotional world must then be sacrificed in order to safeguard the needed tie. Repression was grasped here as a kind of negative organizing principle, always embedded in ongoing intersubjective con texts, determining which configurations of Effective experience are not to be allowed to come into full being. For example, when the act of linguistically articulating an Effective A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma experience is perceived to threaten an indispensable tie, repression can be achieved by preventing the continuation of the process of encoding that experience in language. In such instances, repression keeps affect nameless.

Clinical Vignette The following clinical vignette (a fictionalized composite) illustrates many of the ideas de eloped in this section.

A young woman who had been repeatedly sexually abused by her father when she was a child began therapy with a female trainee whom I was supervising. Early in the treat Bent, whenever the patient began to remember and describe the sexual abuse, or to re count analogously invasive experiences in her current life, she would display emotional reactions that consisted of two distinctive parts, both of which seemed entirely bodily. One was a trembling in her arms and upper torso, which sometimes escalated into violent shaking. The other was an intense flushing of her face. On these occasions, my supervise was quite alarmed by her patient’s shaking and was concerned to find some way to calm her.

(p. 899) I had a hunch that the shaking was a bodily manifestation of a traumatized state and that the flushing was a somatic form of the patient’s shame about exposing this state to her therapist, and I suggested to my supervise that she focus her inquiries on the flushing rather than the shaking. As a result of this shift in focus, the patient began to speak about how she believed her therapist viewed her when she was trembling or soak ing: Surely her analyst must be regarding her with disdain, seeing her as a damaged mess of a human being. As this belief was repeatedly disconfirmed by her therapist’s re spending with attunement and understanding rather than contempt, both the flushing and the shaking diminished in intensity. The traumatized states actually underwent a process of transformation from being exclusively bodily states into ones in which the bod ily sensations came to be united with words. Instead of only shaking, the patient began to speak about her terror of annihilating intrusion.

The one and only time the patient had attempted to speak to her mother about the sexual abuse, her mother shamed her severely, declaring her to be a wicked little girl for making up such lies about her father. Thereafter, the patient dissociative identity disorder not tell any other human being about her trauma until she revealed it to her therapist, and both the flushing of her face and the restriction of her experience of terror to its nameless bodily component were heir to her mother’s shaming. Only with a shift in her perception of her therapist from one in which her therapist was potentially or secretly shaming to one in which she was accept ing and understanding could the patient’s emotional experience of her traumatized states shift from an exclusively bodily form to an experience that could be felt and named as ter ror. Through such naming within the therapeutic context, the painful states gradually be came more bearable.

A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma # The Phenomenology of Trauma I turn now to a phenomenological description of traumatized states, as I myself have ex perienced them. When the book Contexts of Being was first published, an initial batch of copies was sent “hot-off-the-press” to the display table at a conference where I was a panelist. I picked up a copy and looked around excitedly for my late wife, Bede, who would be so pleased and happy to see it. She was, of course, nowhere to be found, having died some twenty months earlier. I had awakened the morn ing of February 23, 1991, to find her lying dead across our bed, four weeks after her metastatic cancer had been diagnosed. Spinning around to show her my book and finding her gone instantly transported me back to that devastating moment in which I woke up and found her dead, and my world shattered. I was once again consumed with horror and 1 sorrow.

There was a dinner at that conference for all the panelists, many of whom were my old and good friends and close colleagues. Yet as I looked around the ballroom, they all seemed like strange and alien beings to me. Or more accurately, I seemed like a strange and alien being—not of this world. The others seemed so vitalized, engaged with one an other in a lively manner. I, in contrast, felt deadened and broken, a shell of the man I had once been. An (p. 900) unbridgeable gulf seemed to open up, separating me forever from my friends and colleagues. They could never even begin to fathom my experience, I thought to myself, because we now lived in altogether different worlds.

Over the course of six years following that painful occasion, I tried to understand and conceptualize the dreadful sense of estrangement and isolation that seems to me to be in herent to the experience of emotional trauma. I became aware that this sense of alien Cation and aloneness appears as a common theme in the trauma literature, and I was able to hear about it from many of my patients who had experienced se ere traumatization. One such young man, who had suffered multiple losses of beloved family members during his childhood and adulthood, told me that the world was divided into two group: the Formals and the traumatized ones. There was no possibility, he said, for a normal ever to grasp the experience of a traumatized one.

In 1998 I found an explanation for this estrangement in what I called the absolutists of everyday life and presented my account in a brief article: When a person says to a friend, “I’ll see you later,” or a parent says to a child at bedtime, “I’ll see you in the morning,” these are statements, like delusions, whose validity is not open for discus ion. Such absolutists are the basis for a kind of naive realism and optimism that allow one to function in the world, experienced as stable and predictable. It is in the essence of emotional trauma that it shatters these absolutists, a catastrophic loss of innocence that permanently alters one’s sense of being-in-the-world. Massive deconstruction of the also lutisms of everyday life exposes the inescapable contingency of existence on a universe that is random and unpredictable and in which no safety or continuity of being can be as Cured. Trauma thereby exposes “the unbearable embeddedness of being” ( Stolorow and Atwood 1992: 22). As a result, the traumatized person cannot help but perceive aspects of A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma existence that lie well outside the absolutized horizons of normal everydayness. It is in this sense that the worlds of traumatized persons are felt to be fundamentally incommen Curable with those of others, the deep chasm in which an anguished sense of estrange Bent and solitude takes form (Stolorow and Atwood 1992: 467).

Trauma’s Existential Significance Once George Atwood and I, in the mid-1970s, had embarked upon our project of rethink 2 ing psychoanalysis as a form of phenomenological inquiry, a focus on the mutually en rising interface of psychoanalysis and continental phenomenology became inescapable, and I began studying phenomenological philosophy, sometimes voraciously. In 2000, I formed a leaderless philosophical study group in which we devoted a year to a close read ing of Heidegger’s (1927 ) magnum opus, Being and Time. When I read the passages therein devoted to his existential analysis of Angst, I nearly fell off my chair! Both Heidegger’s phenomenological description and ontological account of Angst bore a re markable resemblance to what I had written about the phenomenology and meaning of emotional trauma two years earlier. (p. 901) Thus, Heidegger’s existential philosophy—in particular, his existential analysis of Angst—provided me with extraordinary philosophical tools for grasping the existential significance of emotional trauma. It was this latter dis covey that motivated me to begin doctoral studies in philosophy and to write a disserta son and two books on Heidegger, trauma, and what I came to call post-Cartesian psychoanalysis.

Like Freud (1926 ), Heidegger made a sharp distinction between fear and anxiety. Where as, according to Heidegger (1927 ), that in the face of which one fears is a definite “entity within-the-world”, that in the face of which one is anxious is “completely indefi Bite” and turns out to be “Being-in-the-world as such”. The indefiniteness of anxiety “tells us that entities within-the-world are not ‘relevant’ at all... [The world] col lapses into itself [and] has the character of completely lacking significance”. Hei dagger made clear that it is the significance of the average everyday world, the world as constituted by the public interpretedness of the “they” ( das Man ), whose collapse is dis closed in anxiety. Furthermore, insofar as the “utter insignificance” of the everyday world is disclosed in anxiety, anxiety includes a feeling of uncanniness, in the sense of “not being-at-home”. In anxiety, the experience of “Being-at-home [in one’s tranquil zed] everyday familiarity” with the publicly interpreted world collapses, and “Be 3 ing-in enters into the existential ‘mode’ of... ‘uncanniness’ ”.

In Heidegger’s ontological account of anxiety, the central features of its phenom nology—the collapse of everyday significance and the resulting feeling of uncanniness— are claimed to be grounded in what he called authentic (non-evasively owned) Being-to ward-death. Existentially, death is not simply an event that has not yet occurred or that happens to others, as das Man would have it. Rather, it is a distinctive possibility that is constitutive of our existence—of our intelligibility to ourselves in our futurity and our Mini Dude. It is “the possibility of the impossibility of any existence at all”, which, be A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma cause it is both certain and indefinite as to its when, always impends as a constant threat, robbing us of the tranquilizing illusions that characterize our absorption in the everyday world, nullifying its significance for us. The appearance of anxiety indicates that the fun damental defensive purpose (fleeing) of average everydayness has failed and that authen tic Being-toward-death has broken through the evasions that conceal it. Torn from the sheltering illusions of das Man, we feel uncanny—no longer safely at home.

I have contended that emotional trauma produces an Effective state whose features bear a close similarity to the central elements in Heidegger’s existential interpretation of anti ety and that it accomplishes this by plunging the traumatized person into a form of au thentic Being-toward-death. Trauma shatters the illusions of every day life that evade and cover up the finitude, contingency, and embeddedness of our xis Fence and the indefiniteness of its certain extinction. Such shattering exposes what had been heretofore concealed, thereby plunging the traumatized person into a form of au thentic Being-toward-death and into the anxiety—the loss of significance, the uncanniness —through which authentic Being-toward-death is disclosed. Trauma, like death, individu alizes us, in a manner that invariably manifests in an excruciating sense of singularity and solitude.

(p. 902) The particular form of authentic Being-toward-death that crystallized in the wake of the trauma of Bede’s death I characterize as a Being-toward-loss. Loss of loved ones constantly impends for me as a certain, indefinite, and ever-present possibility, in terms of which I now always understand myself and my world. My own experience of traumatic loss and its aftermath was a source of motivation for my efforts to relationalize Heidegger’s conception of finitude by claiming that authentic Being-toward-death always entails owning up, not only to one’s own finitude, but also to the finitude of all those we love. Hence, authentic Being-toward-death always includes Being-toward-loss as a central constituent. Just as, existentially, we are “always dying already” ( Heidegger 1927: 298), so too are we always already grieving. Death and loss are existentially equiprimordial. Ex istential anxiety anticipates both death and loss. (p. 902) The particular form of authentic Being-toward-death that crystallized in the wake of the trauma of Bede’s death I characterize as a Being-toward-loss. Loss of loved ones constantly impends for me as a certain, indefinite, and ever-present possibility, in terms of which I now always understand myself and my world. My own experience of traumatic loss and its aftermath was a source of motivation for my efforts to relationalize Heidegger’s conception of finitude by claiming that authentic Being-toward-death always entails owning up, not only to one’s own finitude, but also to the finitude of all those we love. Hence, authentic Being-toward-death always includes Being-toward-loss as a central constituent. Just as, existentially, we are “always dying already” ( Heidegger 1927: 298), so too are we always already grieving. Death and loss are existentially equiprimordial. Ex istential anxiety anticipates both death and loss.

Support for my claim about the equiprimordiality of death and loss can be found in the work of Derrida, who contended that every friendship is structured from its beginning, a prior, by the possibility that one of the two friends will die first and that the surviving friend will be left to mourn: “To have a friend, to look at him, to follow him with your eyes,... is to know in a more intense way, already injured,... that one of the two of you will inevitably see the other die” ( Derrida 2001: 107). Finitude and the possibility of mourning are constitutive of every friendship.

A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma # Dissociation, Finitude, and Traumatic Tempo # Orality In the course of my investigations of the phenomenology and existential meaning of emo tonal trauma, I have conceptualized dissociation as the keeping apart of incommensu able emotional worlds, and I have rethought the phenomenon of dissociation in terms of 4 the devastating impact of emotional trauma on our experience of temporality. Dissociation, I contend, is traumatic temporality, and traumatic temporality is the conj son for the possibility of the defensive use of dissociation.

A patient of mine with a long, painful history of traumatic vi orations, shocks, and losses arrived at her session in a profoundly fragmented state. Shortly before, she had seen her psychopharmacologist for a twenty-minute interview. In an apparent attempt to update her files, this psychiatrist had required the patient to re count her entire history of traumatization, with no attention given to the emotional im pact of this recounting. The patient explained to me that with the retelling of each Frau masc episode, a piece of herself broke off and relocated at the time and place of the orig Anal trauma. By the time she reached my office, she said, she was completely dispersed along the time dimension of her crushing life-history. Upon hearing this, I spoke just three words: “Trauma destroys time.” The patient’s eyes grew wide; she smiled and said, “I just came together again.”

(p. 903) I use the term portkey, which I borrowed from the Harry Potter book series, to capture the profound impact of emotional trauma on our experience of time. Harry was a severely traumatized little boy, nearly killed by his parents’ murderer and left in the care of a family that mistreated him cruelly. He arose from the ashes of divas Bating trauma as a wizard in possession of wondrous magical powers, and yet never free from the original trauma, always under threat by his parents’ murderer. As a wizard, he encountered portkeys—objects that transported him instantly to other places, obliterating 5 the duration ordinarily required for travel from one location to another. Portkeys to Frau 6 ma return one again and again to an experience of traumatization. As shown dramatical ly in the foregoing paragraph, the experience of such portkeys fractures, and can even obliterate, one’s sense of unitary selfhood, of being-in-time.

Trauma devastatingly disrupts the ordinary, average-everyday linearity and “ecstatical unity of temporality” ( Heidegger 1927: 416), the sense of “stretching-along” from the past to an open future. Experiences of emotional trauma become freeze-framed into an eternal present in which one remains forever trapped, or to which one is condemned to be perpetually returned through the portkeys supplied by life’s slings and arrows. In the region of trauma all duration or stretching along collapses, past becomes present, and future loses all meaning other than endless repetition. In this sense it is trauma, not, as Freud would have it, the unconscious that is timeless.

A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma Because trauma so profoundly modifies the universal or shared structure of temporality, the traumatized person quite literally lives in another kind of reality, an experiential world felt to be incommensurable with those of others. This felt incommensurability, in turn, contributes to the sense of alienation and estrangement from other human beings that typically haunts the traumatized person. Torn from the communal fabric of being-intime, trauma remains insulated from human dialogue.

The endless recurrence of emotional trauma is ensured by the finitude of our existence and the finitude of all those with whom we are deeply connected. Authentic temporality, insofar as it owns up to human finitude, is traumatic temporality. “Trauma recovery” is an oxymoron—human finitude with its traumatizing impact is not an illness from which one can recover. “Recovery” is a misnomer for the constitution of an expanded emotional world that coexists alongside the absence of the one that has been shattered by trauma. The expanded world and the absent shattered world may be more or less integrated or dissociated, depending on the degree to which the unbearable emotional pain evoked by the traumatic shattering has become integrated or remains dissociated defensively, which 7 depends in turn on the extent to which such pain found a relational home in which it could be held. This is the essential fracturing at the heart of traumatic temporality. Dipso cation just is traumatic temporality.

(p. 904) Therapeutic Implications: Emotional # Dwelling How can a therapeutic relationship be constituted wherein the therapist can serve as a relational home for unbearable emotional pain and existential vulnerability? Recently, I have been moving toward a more active, relationally engaged form of therapeutic comportment that I call emotional dwelling. In dwelling, one does not merely seek empathically to understand the other’s emotional pain from the other’s perspective. One does that, but much more. In dwelling, one leans into the other’s emotional pain and participates in it, perhaps with aid of one’s own analogous experiences of pain. I have found that this active, engaged, participatory comportment is especially important in the therapeutic approach to emotional trauma. The language that one uses to address another’s experience of emotional trauma meets the trauma head-on, articulating the un bearable and the unendurable, saying the unsalable, unmitigated by any efforts to soothe, comfort, encourage, or reassure—such efforts invariably being experienced by the other as a shunning or turning away from his or her traumatized state.

Let me give an example of emotional dwelling and the sort of language it employs from my own personal life. In the immediate aftermath of my late wife Bede’s death, my soul brother, George Atwood, was the only person among my friends and family members who was capable of dwelling with me in the magnitude of my emotional devastation. He said, in his inimitable way, “You are a destroyed human being. You are on a train to nowhere.” George lost his mother when he was eight years old, and I think his dwelling in and inch grating his own experience of traumatic loss enabled him to be an understanding home A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma for mine. He knew that offering me encouraging platitudes would be a form of emotional distancing that would just create a wall between us.

If we are to be an understanding relational home for a traumatized person, we must tiler ate, even draw upon, our own existential vulnerabilities so that we can dwell unflinching ly with his or her unbearable and recurring emotional pain. When we dwell with others’ unendurable pain, their shattered emotional worlds are enabled to shine with a kind of sacredness that calls forth an understanding and caring engagement within which Frau matized states can be gradually transformed into bearable and nameable painful feelings.

Concluding Remarks: Toward an Ethics of Mini # Dude What is it in our existential structure that makes the offering and the finding of a relation al home for emotional trauma possible? I have contended that just as finitude and vulnerability to death and loss are fundamental to our existential constitu son, so too is it constitutive of our existence that we meet each other as “brothers and sisters in the same dark night” ( Vowel 1994: 97), deeply connected with one another in virtue of our common finitude. Thus, although the possibility of emotional trauma is ever present, so (p. 905) too is the possibility of forming bonds of deep emotional attunement within which devastating emotional pain can be held, rendered more tolerable, and, hope fully, eventually integrated. Our existential kinship-in-the-same-darkness is the condition for the possibility both of the profound contextuality of emotional trauma and of the meta Dive power of human understanding.

I suggest, as does Vowel, that owning up to our existential kinship-in-finitude has significant ethical implications insofar as it motivates us, or even obligates us, to care about and for our brothers’ and sisters’ existential vulnerability and emotional pain. Imagine a society in which the obligation to provide a relational home for the emotional pain that is inherent to the traumatizing impact of our finitude has become a shared ethic cal principle. In such a society, human beings would be much more capable of living in their existential vulnerability, anxiety, and grief, rather than having to revert to the deafen chive, destructive evasions of them so lamentably characteristic of human history. In such a societal context, a new form of identity would become possible, based on owning rather than covering up our existential vulnerability. Vulnerability that finds a hospitable Bela tonal home could be seamlessly and constitutively integrated into whom we experience ourselves as being. A new form of human solidarity would also become possible, rooted not in shared grandiose and destructive ideological illusion, but in shared recognition and respect for our common human finitude. If we can help one another bear the darkness rather than evade it, perhaps one day we will be able to see the light—as finite human be Dings, finitely bonded to one another.

A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma # Acknowledgments This article was originally published as “A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma” by Robert D. Stolorow in The Psychoanalytic Review 102: 123–138, Copyright © 2015, Guilford Press.

Bibliography Atwood G. E. and Stolorow R. D.. Structures of Subjectivity: Explorations in Psy choanalytic Phenomenology and Contextualism, 2nd edn. London: Rutledge. Baling, M.. “Trauma and Object Relationship.” International Journal of Psycho- Analysis 50: 429–435. Carr R. B.. “Combat and Human Existence: Toward an Intersubjective Approach to Combat Related post-traumatic stress disorder.” Psychoanalytic Psychology 28: 471–496. Derrida J.. The Work of Mourning P.-A. Brault and M. Baas (eating disorders.) Chicago: Univer City of Chicago Press. Ferenczi S.. “Confusion of Tongues between Adults and the Child.” In Final Contra bunions to the Problems and Methods of Psycho-analysis, pp. 156–167. London: Hogarth Press. Freud S.. “The Unconscious.” In J. Strachey (ed. and trans.), The Stan Bard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, 24 vols, 14: 159– 204. London: Hogarth Press. Freud S.. “Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety.” Standard ed., 20: 77–175. (p. 906) Heidegger M.. Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robin son. New York: Harper & Row. Herman J.. Trauma and Recovery. New York: Basic Books. Khan M. M. R.. “The Concept of Cumulative Trauma.” In The Privacy of the Self, pp. 42–58. Madison: International Universities Press. Kohut H.. The Analysis of the Self. Madison: International Universities Press. Krystal H.. Integration and Self-healing: Affect, Trauma, Alexithymia. Hillsdale: Analytic Press. Rowling J. K.. Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. New York: Scholastic Press. Socarides D. D. and Stolorow R. D. (1984/1985). “Affects and Self Objects.” The Annual of Psychoanalysis 12/13: 105–119.

A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma Stolorow R. D.. “The Phenomenology of Trauma and the Absolutists of Everyday Life: A Personal Journey.” Psychoanalytic Psychology 16: 464–468.

Stolorow R. D.. Trauma and Human Existence: Autobiographical, Psychoanalytic, and Philosophical Reflections. New York: Rutledge.

Stolorow R. D.. World, Affectivity, Trauma: Heidegger and Post-Cartesian Psycho analysis. New York: Rutledge.

Stolorow R. D.. “Undergoing the Situation: Emotional Dwelling is More Than Em pathic Understanding.” International Journal of Psychoanalytic Self Psychology 9: 80– 83.

Stolorow R. D. and Atwood G. E.. Contexts of Being: The Intersubjective Fonda sons of Psychological Life. Hillsdale: Analytic Press.

Stolorow R. D., Atwood G. E., and Orange D. M.. Worlds of Experience: Interweave ing Philosophical and Clinical Dimensions in Psychoanalysis. New York: Basic Books.

Vowel L.. The Fragile “We”: Ethical Implications of Heidegger’s Being and Time. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Winnicott D. W.. Through Pediatrics to Psychoanalysis. New York: Basic Books.

Notes:

1 ( ) Borrowing a term from the Harry Potter book series, I call such expert Fences portkeys to trauma, as discussed later in this article.

2 ( ) An account of the historical evolution of this four-decades long collaborative project can be found in chapter 6 of Structures of Subjectivity: Explorations in Psychoanalytic Phenomenology and Contextualism, 2nd edn..

3 ( ) Compare to the description of my traumatized state in the second paragraph of the preceding section, “The Phenomenology of Trauma.”

4 ( ) By temporality I mean the lived experience of time.

5 ( ) My wife, Dr. Julia Schwartz, first brought this imagery of portkeys to my attention as a metaphor that captures the impact of trauma on the experience of temporality.

6 ( ) See the first paragraph of the section, “The Phenomenology of Trauma” for a vivid per Tonal example of such a portkey.

7 ( ) In authentic existing, such a relational home is also itself recognized as finite.

Robert D. Stolorow A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, UCLA School of Medicine and Fellow, American Board and Academy of Psychoanalysis A Phenomenological-Contextual, Existential, and Ethical Perspective on Emotional Trauma Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, UCLA School of Medicine and Fellow, American Board and Academy of Psychoanalysis Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience Reorg Northoff The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Sep 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords The aim of this chapter is to introduce spatiotemporal psychopathology and the way it may complement and extend phenomenological psychopathology by bridging the method logical gap between brain and experience. The first section gives examples of spatiotem oral correspondence between neuronal and psychopathological features. Specifically, it discusses how spatial changes in the brain’s spontaneous activity translate into abnormal experience of the self in major depressive disorder (major depressive disorder). This is followed by the second section which focuses on spatiotemporal continuity. Specifically, the second section high lights the special relevance of temporal changes in spontaneous activity and its relation to the world and how that translates into hallucinations in schizophrenia. Finally, the third section briefly discusses the method of such spatiotemporal psychopathology and distinguishes it from other forms of psychopathology with a special focus on showing the continuity between spatiotemporal and phenomenological psychopathology.

Keywords: phenomenological psychopathology, spatiotemporal psychopathology, experience, world, resting state activity, spatiotemporal structure Neither the ‘brainless’ psychiatry of the middle of the 20th century, nor the “mind less” variety of the past 30 years should be taken to represent the most we can achieve. The future should yield a synthesis.

(Panksepp 2004: 17)

Introduction Methodological Gap between Experience and Brain Psychopathology concerns the empirical and theoretical framework in which symptoms, behavior, and experiences in psychiatric patients can be described, categorized, and Alas sifted (Paras, Sass, and Zahavi 2008; Paras, Sass, and Zahavi 2013; Stanghellini 2009a; Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience 2009b; Stanghellini and Brooke 2014). Different empirical and theoretical frameworks have been suggested in past and present approaches to psychopathology, including cogni Dive psychopathology, Effective psy chopathology, phenomenological psychopathology, clinical psychopathology (current classification systems like DSM-5 and ICD-10), and the recent Research Domain Operational Classification (RDoC) classification that entails behavioral and computational psychopathology.

Despite their virtues for single functions (like Effective, cognitive, etc.), all these ap roaches suffer from a methodological gap between the brain, on the one hand, and (p. 910) experience and symptoms on the other. Neither approach shows why or how the symptoms and their experience are related to and based on the brain. This is not a prob lem specific to psychiatry though but holds for current neuroscience in general. We cur Gently do not know how and why the neuronal activity of the brain generates or yields mental features like self and consciousness. This lack of knowledge reverberates particu Carly in psychiatry where the various psychopathological symptoms are essentially mental symptoms.

The different psychopathological approaches take either side of the gap, that is, mental or neuronal, as a starting point. For instance, phenomenological psychiatry takes expert Once or consciousness itself as starting point and focuses on exploring first-person expert Fences in detail. Specifically, the focus is on the first-person experience of time and space as well as body, self, and world. The brain, in contrast, nowhere surfaces in experience in particu lar, and phenomenology in general, since it cannot be accessed in experience in first-per son perspective but only in observation as in third-person perspective. The brain is thus excluded in experience of the own self, body, and world including time and space in par titular and phenomenology in general. Such exclusion of the brain in experience or con sciousness occurs by default, for example, on methodological grounds, since the brain cannot be accessed in experience in first-person perspective.

The exclusion of the brain in experience raises the question for phenomenological psy chopathology of how experience can be linked to the brain. This question becomes even more crucial given the fact that recent brain imaging shows the relationship of psy chopathological symptoms to neural alterations in the brain. That leaves open though how the experience of those psychopathological symptoms and of self, world, and body in Eluding time and space can be related to the brain and its neural changes. In other words, phenomenological psychopathology needs to establish a bridge or link to the brain and thus from phenomenal to neural activity. How is that possible? One way is to search for a “common currency” that is shared by both, experience and brain, and, at the same time, underlies our experience of self, body, and world as well as our observation of neural ac tivity changes in the brain. I suggest in this chapter that such “common currency” shared between experience and brain consists in time and space. Alterations in time and space Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience may then be manifest in both abnormal experience of self, body, and world as well as ab normal neural activity changes in the brain. Psychopathological symptoms may then Multi Lately be traced to alterations in time and space hence my suggestions of what I de scribe as “spatiotemporal psychopathology.” Considered in this way, spatiotemporal psy chopathology can be considered an extension of phenomenological psychopathology from experience to the brain.

Very much like phenomenological psychopathology, biological psychiatry too is confront ed with a gap, although this occurs from the opposite side. Biological psychiatry invest gates the brain’s neuronal states in all their molecular, genetic, cellular, regional, and net work levels as they can methodologically be approached in third-person perspective. However, this leaves out experience and its first-person perspective. Experience is thus excluded on methodological grounds in biological psychiatry in the same way and as much as the brain is often (though not always) excluded in phenomenological psychiatry. The methodological gap between experience and brain is thus mutual, being fostered from both sides, brain and experience, for example, biological and phenomenological psy chiatry.

How now can we bridge the gap from biological psychiatry to phenomenological psy chopathology? For that we need to go back to what potentially underlies the observed (p. 911) neural activity changes in the brain which, as I will demonstrate below, can be found in the temporal and spatial organization of the brain’s neural activity. There is re cent empirical evidence that such temporal and spatial changes do indeed feature psych attic disorders like depression and schizophrenia (see below). These alterations in time and space underlying the observed brain’s neural activity may then provide the bridge to the abnormal experience of time and space that underlie the abnormal experience of self, body, and world as investigated in phenomenological psychopathology. Spatiotemporal psychopathology can consecutively be considered an extension of biological psychiatry from the brain toward experience in more or less the same way (though reversed dire son) as it is an extension of phenomenological psychopathology from experience to the brain. In the following, I shall specify the exact positioning and characterization of spa tiotemporal psychopathology as extension of both phenomenological psychopathology and biological psychiatry in methodological regards which will be followed by illustrating such approach by specific examples.

“Common Currency” Between Experience and # Brain How can we close the gap between experience and brain? Closing this gap is central for psychiatry since we need to understand the processes that transform abnormal neuronal into phenomenal states which psychiatric patients experience in first-person perspective. How can we apprehend these transformative processes, for example, neuronal-phenom nal transformation? For that we may want to search for a shared overlap or “common cur Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience ency” between neuronal and phenomenal states that drives the transformation of the for mer into the latter.

The shared overlap or common currency between neuronal and phenomenal states, for example, brain and experience, may consist in spatiotemporal features. On the side of the brain, it is the spontaneous activity (rather than its stimulus-induced or task-evoked active ity that may be central in providing or constituting such spatiotemporal structure (see be low for details). The brain’s spontaneous activity shows certain spatiotemporal features, a particular spatial and temporal structure in its neural activity that surfaces in and is transformed into phenomenal state, for example, experience (see for many examples). One would consequently expect a common, similar, or analogous spa tiotemporal structure between the brain’s spontaneous activity and the phenomenal fea Cures of experience.

The shared overlap or common currency between neuronal and phenomenal states, for example, brain and experience, may consist in spatiotemporal features. On the side of the brain, it is the spontaneous activity (rather than its stimulus-induced or task-evoked active ity that may be central in providing or constituting such spatiotemporal structure (see be low for details). The brain’s spontaneous activity shows certain spatiotemporal features, a particular spatial and temporal structure in its neural activity that surfaces in and is transformed into phenomenal state, for example, experience (see for many examples). One would consequently expect a common, similar, or analogous spa tiotemporal structure between the brain’s spontaneous activity and the phenomenal fea Cures of experience.

Such common, similar, or analogous spatiotemporal structure between brain and expert Once amounts to what I describe as “spatiotemporal correspondence.” The concept of spatiotemporal correspondence means that the brain’s spontaneous activity and the phe nominal features of experience show corresponding or analogous spatial and temporal features: the spatial and temporal configuration or structure of the neural activity in the brain’s spontaneous activity surface in the spatial and temporal features within which the contents of experience (like specific objects or events including body, self, and world) are integrated and thus structured and organized. For instance, a recent study of ours demonstrated that private (p. 912) self-consciousness is directly related to the temporal patterns of spontaneous or resting state activity across different frequency ranges (as in Hexed by what is described as “power law”). This suggests that mental features like self may be rooted in spatiotempo ral features of the brain’s spontaneous activity. The self as mental feature may then be characterized in spatiotemporal terms, that is, by specific spatiotemporal schemata or structure rather than by cognition of particular contents (see Figure 85.1).

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience Figure 85. Different levels in spatiotemporal psy chopathology.

Unlike biological psychiatry that focuses on the brain itself independent of its respective ecological context, phenomenological psychiatry emphasizes the integration of expert Once including the subject of experience within the ecological context of the world. There is continuity between experience and world with such continuity often assumed to be me dated by the body, for example, experience of the body as lived body (see for instance Northoff and Stanghellini ). Such continuity between subject and world is deemed central for making experience including the first-person perspective itself first and fore most possible.

Spatiotemporal Psychopathology What exactly is the “common currency” that allows for continuity between experience and brain? The continuity between experience and brain may ultimately be traced to the continuity between world and brain. Let us give an empirical example. Duncan et al. recently demonstrated that early childhood traumatic experience is manifest in adulthood in the spatiotemporal patterns of the brain’s spontaneous activity (as indexed by entropy) (p. 913) which, in turn, impacts subsequent stimulus-induced activity in Bela son to aversive stimuli. The continuity between experience and brain can thus be traced to continuity between world and brain as it is manifest in the spatiotemporal pattern of the latter’s spontaneous activity. One may consequently want to speak of “spatiotemporal continuity” between world and brain. The concept of “spatiotemporal continuity” refers to the fact that certain spatial and temporal features are continuous from world to brain as for instance when certain temporal differences in the environment (as between specific stimuli) resurface in the temporal difference of the brain’s spontaneous activity.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience I postulate that the two features as introduced here, spatiotemporal correspondence and spatiotemporal continuity, are hallmark features of what can be described as “spatiotem oral psychopathology”. The concept of “spa tiotemporal psychopathology” refers to the fact that psychopathological symptoms are conceived primarily in spatiotemporal terms rather than in cognitive (as in cognitive psy chopathology), phenomenological (as in phenomenological psychopathology), Effective (as in Effective psychopathology), or neuronal terms (as in biological psychopathology).

How does such spatiotemporal psychopathology stand in relation to the other forms of psychopathology? One central distinguishing feature concerns the contents of our expert Once. Biological psychiatry, in contrast, focuses on contents in that it aims to reveal the neural underpinnings of the cognitive, Effective, sensorimotor, and social contents. This is different in spatiotemporal psychopathology. Here the focus is not on contents at all but rather on how these contents can be characterized in spatial and temporal terms include ing their respective spatiotemporal context which, phenomenologically, can be traced to the life-world, for example, the world as experienced. The focus is thus not on contents themselves but on the spatiotemporal structure within which the contents are organized. Psychopathological symptoms are consequently characterized by structure-based alter Cations of temporal and spatial structure rather than content-based changes. This puts spatiotemporal psychopathology in close relation to phenomenological psychopathology that also considers the contents of experience in the wider context of self, body, and world. However, spatiotemporal psychopathology is even more radical than phenomena logical psychopathology in that the central phenomenological constituents like self, body, and world are also conceived in spatiotemporal terms and thus within the context of time and space.

How does such spatiotemporal psychopathology stand in relation to the other forms of psychopathology? One central distinguishing feature concerns the contents of our expert Once. Biological psychiatry, in contrast, focuses on contents in that it aims to reveal the neural underpinnings of the cognitive, Effective, sensorimotor, and social contents. This is different in spatiotemporal psychopathology. Here the focus is not on contents at all but rather on how these contents can be characterized in spatial and temporal terms include ing their respective spatiotemporal context which, phenomenologically, can be traced to the life-world, for example, the world as experienced. The focus is thus not on contents themselves but on the spatiotemporal structure within which the contents are organized. Psychopathological symptoms are consequently characterized by structure-based alter Cations of temporal and spatial structure rather than content-based changes. This puts spatiotemporal psychopathology in close relation to phenomenological psychopathology that also considers the contents of experience in the wider context of self, body, and world. However, spatiotemporal psychopathology is even more radical than phenomena logical psychopathology in that the central phenomenological constituents like self, body, and world are also conceived in spatiotemporal terms and thus within the context of time and space.

The aim of this chapter is to introduce spatiotemporal psychopathology and the way it may complement and extent phenomenological psychopathology by bridging the method logical gap between brain and experience. In the first section I will provide examples for spatiotemporal correspondence between neuronal and psychopathological features. Specifically, I will discuss how spatial changes in the brain’s spontaneous activity trans late into abnormal experience of the self in major depressive disorder (major depressive disorder). This is fol lowed by the second section where I will focus on spatiotemporal continuity. Specifically, the second section highlights the special relevance of temporal changes in spontaneous activity and its relation to the world and how that translates into hallucinations in schizo phrenia. Finally, in the third section, I will briefly discuss the method of such spatiotem oral psychopathology and distinguish it from the methods relied on in other forms of psychopathology with a special focus on showing the continuity between spatiotemporal and phenomenological psychopathology. (p. 914)

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience # Spatiotemporal Correspondence: Spontaneous # Activity’s Spatial Structure and Self in Depress # ion As an example of the approach of spatiotemporal psychopathology, we can examine major depressive disorder (major depressive disorder). In a recent meta-analysis Alvaro looked at the brain’s resting state activity, that is, the neural activity that can be observed in different regions and networks during the absence of spe civic stimuli or tasks. This yielded hyperactive regions in medial prefrontal cortex like perigenual anterior cingulate cortex (PACC) and ventromedial pre frontal cortex (VMPFC) (as well as subcortical midlife regions as thalami regions like the dorsomedial thalamus and the pulvinar, pallidum/putamen and midbrain regions like ventral tegmental area (VTA), Substantial nigga (SN), the Rectum, and the periaqueductal gray (PAG). In contrast, resting state activity was hypoactive in lateral prefrontal cortex regions being reduced in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (and other regions like the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and adjacent precuneus/cuneus (see also for sim liar results). Especially the medial prefrontal resting state hyperactivity changes in PACC and VMPFC seems to be somehow specific for depression since in schizophrenia there is rather hypoactivity (see (see Figure 85.2).

En el document/libro hay una tabla/figure/esquema que se Suede resumir Como Figure 85. Spatial correspondence in depression.

(p. 915) The medial prefrontal regions like PACC and VMPFC are core regions of the de fault-mode network (DMN) while lateral prefrontal regions like DLPFC are part of the central executive network (CEN). A recent meta-analysis of resting state functional con nectivity observed the following abnormal changes in these networks that seem to be (more or less) specific to major depressive disorder as distinguished from other psychiatric disorders. The DMN shows functional hyperconnectiv ity among its regions and especially between anterior and posterior midlife regions. In Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience contrast to the regions within the DMN, regions within the CEN show functional hypocon nectivity and are also less connected to parietal regions implicated in attention toward the external environment. This suggests spatial imbalance between the two networks with an abnormal spatial shift toward the DMN and away from the CEN with the former also enslaving the latter (as suggested by abnormally negative functional hyperconnectiv ity between DMN and CEN. These findings are specific to major depressive disorder as in BD such a pattern cannot be observed while in schizophrenia fun tonal connectivity between DMN and CEN is positive (rather than abnormally negative as in major depressive disorder).

In sum, the data provide evidence for abnormal resting state hyperactivity in medial pre frontal regions as part of the DMN in major depressive disorder while there is resting state hypoactivity in lat real prefrontal regions as part of the CEN. This suggests abnormal reciprocal modulation between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex with resting state activity being abnormally increased in the former and decreased in the latter. Abnormal opposite or reciprocal mod Elation between medial and lateral prefrontal cortical resting state activity in major depressive disorder is fur her supported by analogous functional connectivity: increased functional connectivity in PACC-VMPFC and thus within DMN is accompanied by decreased functional connectivity in lateral prefrontal cortex and the CEN. One can thus speak of abnormal reciprocal modulation between medial/DMN and lateral/CEN prefrontal cortex with their spatial bal Once tilting abnormally toward the former at the expense of the latter.

The question then is how is the abnormal spatial balance between medial and lateral pre frontal cortex related to the psychopathological symptoms in major depressive disorder? This spatial imbal Once on the level of the brain’s spontaneous activity is well reflected on the phenomenal level: major depressive disorder patients’ experiences are characterized by an increased focus on their own in Vernal contents as consisting in either thoughts, as in ruminations with increased self-fo cus, or/and the body leading to the various unspecific somatic symptoms, for example, in creased body-focus. In contrast, these patients’ experience is no longer focused on the ex Vernal environment at all, for example, decreased environment-focus, which psychopath logically is manifest in social withdrawal and lack of motivation. Consequently, one can say that the abnormal spatial structure in the brain’s spontaneous activity translates and surfaces in the spatial structure of experience, for example, the spatial organization of contents with regard to body, self, and environment, which in turn leads to the various kinds of psychopathological symptoms.

(p. 916) Spatiotemporal Continuity: Spontaneous # Activity’s Temporal Structure and Hallucina # son in Schizophrenia Lakatos, Schroeder, Leitman, and Javitt conducted an EEG study in schizophrenic patients whom they presented a stream of auditory stimuli (i.e. tones) with regular, that Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience is, rhythmic interstimulus intervals (1500ms). They presented the stream of auditory stimuli with some deviant stimuli (20%) that were distinguished in their frequency. Sub Sects had to either passively listen (passive task), detect the easily detectable deviant stimuli (easy task), or detect the more difficult (variation by frequency) detectable stimuli (difficult task).

They observed that the phase coherence (i.e. the intertrial coherence/ITC) in different fre quench ranges like delta (1-4Hz that mediates basic processes of the brain’s attunement to its respective environmental context; Northoff (2014a; 2014b)) (in central electrodes that can be traced back to neural activity in auditory cortex) increased from the passive over the easy to the difficult condition with the latter showing the highest degree of ITC at stimulus onset in the delta range. However, this was only the case in healthy subjects whereas such task-related increase in delta ITC was not observed in schizophrenic pa taints. These patients were not able to properly align or shift their auditory cortical phase onsets in the delta range (that corresponded to the stimulation frequency with the ITI of the presented tones) to the onset of the tones and thus to properly adapt their neural ac tivity to the task. This suggests decreased phase alignment or entrainment to external au ditory stimuli.

Interestingly, in the intertrial interval (1500ms) task-dependent amplitude in the delta range could be observed with the highest amplitude in the difficult task. This again was observed only in the healthy subjects whereas schizophrenic subjects dissociative identity disorder not show such delta amplitude in the ITI. In contrast to the phase, that is, ITC, power in delta dissociative identity disorder not in crease during any of the conditions in either healthy or schizophrenic patients. There was, however, a power increase in other frequency ranges, that is, theta (5-7HZ as resat ed to memory processes) and beta (12-30HZ as related to sensorimotor processing) /gam ma (30-40HZ as related to sensory processing) range from passive over easy to difficult tasks in healthy subjects. Schizophrenic patients showed an abnormally strong 7hz in crease while the beta/gamma power was decreased especially during the difficult conj son. Finally, reduced delta ITC correlated with both the behavioral measure, for example, the detection rate of the deviant tones, and the electrophysiological index, the P300 (in response to deviant tones), in schizophrenic subjects. Importantly, reduced delta ITC also predicted the severity of psychopathological symptoms (as measured with BPRS) and es Specially the positive symptoms (including hallucinations, delusions, and excitement).

Abnormal, that is, reduced entrainment of phase onsets to external stimuli have also been observed in other studies in schizophrenia as for instance in response to 40hz auditory stimuli. Other studies also observed major abnormalities in phase resetting in delta (1-4Hz) and theta (5-8Hz) ranges in schizophrenia during an auditory oddball task, which, even more interesting ly, predicted the degree of positive symptoms in schizophrenia, for example, disorganize son (see also Hmm (p. 917) et al. ). Unfortunately, there are no clear findings as yet about cross-frequency coupling between reduced delta phase reset and the phase/ power (or amplitude) of higher frequencies in the beta or gamma range. Based on the Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience findings described here, one would predict that decreased delta phase reset is closely linked to reduced cross-frequency coupling to beta and gamma as it is supported indirect ly by the findings (and the impact of delta phase ITC on ERP like P300) (see above).

Taken together, these findings suggest that schizophrenic patients remain unable proper ly to link their internal auditory cortical neural activity, as indexed by phase onsets in delta, to a stream of external auditory stimuli. Lakatos et al. (2013 ) speak of deficits in ac Dive predictive sensing by phase resetting that does not allow schizophrenic patients to increase their cortical excitability at stimulus onset for the subsequent processing of ex Vernal stimuli. Given the evidence described above, one may indeed assume severe deficits in phase entrainment (or alignment) to external stimuli, that is, internal–external alignment in schizophrenia.

More generally put, phase resetting allows for internal–external stimulus’ (or, more gen rally, rest/brain–environment) alignment and thus for what Schroeder and Lakatos (2009a; 2009b; Schroeder, Lakatos, Kajikawa, Tartan, and Puce 2008; Schroeder, Wilson, Adman, Scharfman, and Lakatos 2010 ) describe as “rhythmic mode” of brain function. The rhythmic mode of brain function can be characterized by good phase alignment of the brain’s low frequency fluctuations (like delta) to the statistical frequency distributions of the external stimuli; this entails also that the high frequencies (like beta and gamma) show decreased power. In contrast, the brain may also operate in a “continuous mode” where the low frequencies are no longer phase-aligned to the external stimuli while the higher frequencies are now decoupled (i.e. low cross-frequency coupling) from the lower ones and show stronger power than in the rhythmic mode.

Given the findings in auditory cortex with decreased delta ITC, increased resting state gamma, decreased task-evoked gamma (see above) and, to some degree, also decreased cross-frequency coupling, one would assume the auditory cortex in schizophrenia would operate in a continuous rather than rhythmic mode in relation to its respective environs mental context. These temporal alterations mean that the schizophrenic patients’ audio ry cortical resting state activity can no longer align and adapt itself to its respective Audi Cory environment, that is, external stimuli and remains quasi “decoupled” or “dissociated” from the external environment. One may consequently want to speak of “sensory decor ling” that describes the reduced entrainment or phase alignment to external sensory stimuli. Instead, as indicated by Lakatos et al., auditory cortical activity may rather align or entrain itself to internal stimuli or events (like thoughts). Instead of sup pressing internal activity during entrainment to external stimuli, auditory cortical activity may instead phase align and entrain itself to internal stimuli of the ongoing resting state while, at the same time, suppressing its alignment to external stimuli (see Figure 85.3).

Specifically, periods of high cortical excitability as provided by the long phase duration of delta oscillations, may now be shifted or reset in orientation on the temporal timing of internal stimuli (like self-generated thoughts) rather than external stimuli (like tones), for example, reversed entrainment or phase alignment. However, that is a hypothesis at this Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience point which needs to be investigated in the future. Such “reversed entrainment or phase alignment” to internal (rather than external) stimuli entails that there is spatiotemporal discontinuity (rather than spatiotemporal continuity) between world/environment and brain in the (p. 918) spontaneous activity. This is phenomenally reflected in the decoupling of experience from the ecological context, for example, the world and results psy chopathologically in auditory hallucinations (and probably delusions).

En el document/libro hay una tabla/figure/esquema que se Suede resumir Como Figure 85. Spatiotemporal (dis)continuity in schizo phrenia.

Rather than focusing on outward contents originating within the world, experience turns inwards to internal contents such as delusions and hallucinations. The abnormal temporal structure of the brain’s spontaneous activity, that is, its phase onsets including their tem oral detachment from the temporal structure of the tones’ onsets, manifests itself in the shift from external tones to internal contents like hallucinations. The abnormal temporal structure of the brain’s spontaneous activity with its lacking phase shift during the tones thus translates into hallucinations as abnormal contents in experience. Rather than orig Bating in the cognitive contents of cognitive function, hallucinations may then be traced to the abnormal temporal structure of the brain’s spontaneous activity and its detach Bent from the temporal structure of the tones in the world.

Spatiotemporal Psychopathology Versus Phe # nomenological Psychopathology Direct Link with “Common Currency” between Brain and Experience How can we characterize the methodology of spatiotemporal psychopathology and how does it compare to other forms of psychopathology? First and foremost, spatiotemporal psychopathology views and approaches psychopathological symptoms in terms of spatial and temporal features rather than contents themselves: psychopathological symptoms are traced to abnormal spatial and temporal structuring of cognitive, Effective, social, and sensorimotor contents. For instance, one may hypothesize that the internal thought con Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience tents (p. 919) are processed in depression in a spatial context that puts abnormal empha sis on them at the expense of external contents leading to ruminations and increased selffocus. The internal contents, for example, the thoughts are thus structured and integral ed spatially in an abnormal way. The same applies to schizophrenia where the sponta nous activity can no longer structure and organize its own temporal features, that is, its phase onsets, in order to align and link them to the auditory tones. Psychopathological symptoms are thus traced to abnormal spatial and temporal structuring of sensorimotor, cognitive, Effective, and social contents in perceptions, emotions, and cognition.

Such spatiotemporal approach distinguishes spatiotemporal psychopathology from other forms of psychopathology that view psychopathological symptoms in either cognitive, af fictive, behavioral, or phenomenal ways (See Table 85.1).

Such spatiotemporal approach distinguishes spatiotemporal psychopathology from other forms of psychopathology that view psychopathological symptoms in either cognitive, af fictive, behavioral, or phenomenal ways (See Table 85.1).

Spatiotemporal psychopathology aims to establish direct links between neuronal and phe nominal states by focusing on the spatiotemporal features as shared overlap or “common currency” between the brain’s spontaneous activity and experience. The spatiotemporal features allow the transformation from neuronal into phenomenal activity thus establish ing a direct link between brain and experience; the temporal and spatial features as con strutted by the brain’s spontaneous activity allow for extending and transforming neu Tonal into phenomenal activity. At the phenomenal level those very same spatial and tem oral features are experienced in first-person perspective as for instance described in the concept of “phenomenal time” and the “stream of con sciousness”. The experience of time and space, in turn, underlies our exp rience of self, body, and world as main focus of phenomenological psychopathology. Spa tiotemporal psychopathology can therefore be considered as much as an extension of the brain/biological psychiatry to experience/phenomenological psychopathology as it can be regarded as extension from the later to the former. Metaphorically speaking, spatiotem oral psychopathology provides the bridge (p. 920) between experience and brain and like any bridge in reality, it allows for direct access from both sides, namely, phenomenal and neural.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience Table 85. Comparison between different forms of psychopathology Spatiotempo Effective Psy ral Psy chopathology chopathology Psychopathol- Spatiotemporal Effective fea Logical sump features Cures toms Link neuronal Direct and spa Indirect and mental tiotemporal through affect Neural activity Spontaneous Task-evoked ac activity tivity Role of expert Methodological Emotional feel Once starting point ing Self, body, and Secondary con Body as basis of world struts emotions Time and space Primary pre- No special role phenomenal constructions Page 13 of 20 Cognitive Psy Phenomena Descriptive chopathology logical Psy Psychopathol chopathology ogy Cognitive fea Phenomenal Operational fea Cures features Cures Indirect none none through cogni son Task-evoked ac none none tivity none Starting and none end point Cognitive con Lived body as Operational struts primary constructs Cognition of Phenomenal No special role time and space features: Inner time/space con sciousness Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience This is different in the other forms of psychopathology where there is a rather indirect link between brain and experience with regard to symptoms: the psychopathological symptoms are here conceived to be mediated by the cognitive, Effective, or behavioral functions of the brain (or the phenomenal features of experience). Such an indirect link ultimately opens a gap between brain and symptoms as described above.

Spatiotemporal psychopathology focuses mainly on the brain’s spontaneous activity rather than the task-evoked or stimulus-induced activity. This is different in the other forms of psychopathology that target cognitive, Effective, and/or behavioral functions as related to stimulus-induced or task-evoked activity in the brain.

Spatiotemporal Psychopathology Versus Phe # nomenological Psychopathology Spatiotemporal psychopathology shares with phenomenological psychopathology the as Gumption of a central role of experience. Both take very seriously experience as the sub jective account of what objectively is described as psychopathological symptoms. In that sense spatiotemporal psychopathology can be considered as phenomenological as phe nomenological psychopathology. In other words, spatiotemporal psychopathology in this sense can be considered an extension of phenomenological psychopathology that shifts the focus from self, body, and world to their underlying temporal and spatial features in experience. Taken in this sense, spatiotemporal psychopathology may be considered a subset of phenomenological psychopathology specifically with regard to the experience of time and space and how that is related to the experience of self, body, and world.

However, unlike phenomenological psychopathology, spatiotemporal psychopathology does not remain within the boundaries of experience itself. It goes beyond experience in that it aims to link experience to the brain and its neural activity. That raises the question for the “common currency” between experience and brain which, per spatiotemporal psy chopathology, can be found in temporal and spatial features: both the brain’s neural active ity especially its spontaneous activity and experience share the spatial and temporal structuring and organizing of contents—spatiotemporal features are the “common current cy” between experience and brain.

Methodologically, this amounts to what can be described as “double access” in spatiotem oral psychopathology. The symptoms can be accessed in terms of the brain and its near al activity and, at the same time, in terms of their experience by the respective subject. Both the brain’s neural activity and the subjects’ experience are conceived in primarily spatiotemporal terms—the brain’s neural activity changes may then be conceived in the spatiotemporal features of the subject’s experience and vice versa. One can for instance investigate whether the degree of shift between selfand environment-focus, that is, the spatial shift between internal and external contents corresponds to the spatial shift be tween medial/DMN and lateral/CEN prefrontal cortical regions (see above). Analogous correspondence between neuronal and mental features can be observed in the temporal Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience domain. The degree (p. 921) of temporal detachment of the brain’s phase onsets from the environment’s tones may correspond to the degree to which the subject’s experiences are determined by internal (rather than external) contents like delusions and hallucinations. In short, spatiotemporal psychopathology supposes spatiotemporal correspondence and continuity between neural and experiential activity.

The role of self, body, and world are different in spatiotemporal psychopathology. Phe nomenological psychopathology takes subjective experience of time and space as well as of self, body, and world as the central and most basic features of psychopathology. Spa tiotemporal psychopathology, in contrast, focuses mainly on time and space, for example, the subjective experience of time and space, as the most basic and fundamental experien ital dimensions as they underlie our experience of self, body, and world. Self, body, and world are not neglected but, unlike in phenomenological psychopathology, they are no longer considered as independent constituents of experience. Instead, they are traced to spatial and temporal features. As mentioned above, a recent study shows that self-con sciousness can be linked with the overall temporal structure of the spontaneous activity. The same holds analogously for the body, that is, the lived body, that can be traced to the spatial structure of the brain’s spontaneous activity. These data lent support to the view that self, body, and world may by themselves be conceived in the spatiotemporal terms of the brain’s spontaneous activity.

Why does spatiotemporal psychopathology conceive self, body, and world in spatiotempo ral terms rather than as basic phenomenal constituents by themselves? This makes it pos Bible for spatiotemporal psychopathology to transgress the boundaries of experience and to link it with the brain. Time and space are considered as the bridge or “common current cy” between experience and brain since, as I suggest, they allow for transforming merely neuronal activity (as we can observe it in the brain) into phenomenal features (as we can experience them). Spatiotemporal psychopathology thus complements phenomenological psychopathology by extending it beyond its own phenomenal boundaries that is, the bor der of experience, to the brain and its spontaneous activity. At the same time, spatiotem oral psychopathology extends the borders of neuroscience beyond the brain itself to ex perience. In the case of both transitions from experience to brain and brain to expert Once, spatiotemporal features serve as guiding thread and “common currency” underlay ing both our experience of self, body, and world as well as our observation of neural active ity changes in the brain. Accordingly, as already pointed out above, spatiotemporal psy chopathology can be regarded as extension of both phenomenological psychopathology and biological psychiatry though from reversed directions.

Finally, it should be pointed out that, due to its functional role as bridge between expert Once and brain, spatiotemporal psychopathology is somewhat intrinsically hybrid. It is phenomenal in that it relies and draws on experience of time and space. At the same time spatiotemporal psychopathology is neuronal in that it searches for how time and space are constructed and realized by the brain and its spontaneous activity. Taken in this Phenomenological Psychopathology and Neuroscience sense, spatiotemporal psychopathology can be considered truly neurophenomenal (rather than being either purely neuronal or phenomenal).

Finally, taken in a more philosophical context, spatiotemporal psychopathology can be considered a methodological or epistemological framework for investigation of psy chopathology in particular and mental features like self and consciousness in general. Fi ally, spatiotemporal psychopathology also carries an ontological dimension in that it tar gets time (p. 922) and space, for example, the construction of time and space by the brain in its relation to body and world, as they actually exist and are real in the world. The rather complex reality of psychiatric disorders as basic disturbances of self, body, and world as thematized so well in phenomenological psychopathology is thus well reflected in the hybrid nature of spatiotemporal psychopathology.

Conclusion I have in this chapter suggested a novel approach to psychopathology, namely, to con cave psychopathological symptoms in terms of their underlying spatiotemporal features. Spatiotemporal psychopathology assumes correspondence and continuity between the spatial and temporal features of the brain’s spontaneous activity on the one hand and the spatial and temporal structure underlying psychopathological symptoms. Such spatiotem oral correspondence was exemplified by ruminations in depression. Moreover, spa tiotemporal psychopathology assumes continuity between the spatial and temporal fea Cures of the world and those of the brain entailing spatiotemporal continuity. For in stance, such spatiotemporal continuity is disrupted in schizophrenia which may be cen Aral in constituting hallucinations and delusions.

Spatiotemporal psychopathology aims to complement and extend phenomenological psy chopathology beyond the phenomenal boundaries of experience reaching out to the brain. Specifically, spatial and temporal features shared by both experience and brain are sought to correspond with each other; the changes in the spatiotemporal structure of the brain’s spontaneous activity are assumed to surface and translate into abnormal spa tiotemporal structuring on the phenomenal level of experience resulting in the various kinds of psychopathological symptoms. Methodologically, this requires double access: the spatiotemporal psychopathologist needs access to subjects’ experience like a phenomena logical psychopathologist while, at the same time, he requires access to the brain’s Upon taneous activity just as the spatiotemporal neuroscientist. This will ultimately enable spa tiotemporal psychopathology to bridge the gap by providing time and space as “common currency” between experience and brain, for example, by their shared spatiotemporal features. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Re search Massimo Ballerina The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Apr 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Qualitative Research (QR) involves an interpretative approach to experimental data, gen rating meaning structures with specific properties. A hermeneutical approach to atom aloes subjectivity is the core feature of phenomenological psychopathology, representing an excellent theoretical background for QR. In this perspective, psychiatric disorders are considered peculiar existential stances: despite all the patients’ biographical details and personal variations, they display a typical invariant structure residing in specific (atom aloes) arrangements of patients’ structures of subjectivity. In phenomenological psy chopathology-oriented QR, first person subjective experiences articulated in personal nar Datives are converted in transpersonal constructs (TPC), valid for a class of individuals — that is, people suffering from schizophrenia. TPC are synthetic schemes of comprehend ion of a manifold of experiences; they outline the typical invariant features of anomalous experiences, translating the first person subjective perspective in third person, objective descriptions; TPC reflect specific forms of patients’ anomalous subjectivity.They describe efficaciously the existential arrangement of people affected by specific psychiatric Visor Hers, contributing to the fine description of clinical phenotype. Refined TPC may be em Cloyed to draw rating scales Keywords: qualitative research, phenomenological psychopathology, mental illness, psychiatric disorders, atom aloes subjectivity, consciousness, subjectivity, structures of subjectivity, unstructured experiences # What is Qualitative Research CAN qualitative research (QR) be considered as a set of empirical studies the findings of which are simply delivered without any numerical (statistical) procedures?

Such a concept is largely unsatisfactory as QR has a further, distinctive value. QR is an empirical investigation “into meaning” which sets Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research about “to make sense of, or to interpret, phenomena in terms of the meanings people bring to them”.

A plurality of qualitative methodologies (QMs) are available to researchers: they diverge in the modality of data collection. In psychiatry, the most commonly em Cloyed are field observations (direct observations of the investigated phenomena where they take place), focus groups (peer groups that discuss personal experience), and indepth interviews (extensive investigations of subjective experiences).

The Standards of Qualitative Research Looked at globally, QMs display a set of common principles: a) Meanings as results QR involves an interpretative approach to experimental data, with findings reflecting the personal perspective (subjective meanings, attitudes, and beliefs) toward the topic under inquiry.

(p. 926)

b) Conceptualizations as an inductive process Data conceptualization is the outcome of research, rooted in the “unfolding” of the emir cal data.

Using interpretative procedures, the collected data gradually produces overall meanings, generating categories with specific properties. This approach has been referred as “Grounded Theory”. In contrast, quantitative research ne cessitates a prior defined paradigms, provided with hypotheses to challenge, the sup posed intervening variables and their assessment measures.

c) Naturalistic real-world approach QR is not confined to laboratory paradigms, but rather looks at the “contextualized” realworld relevance of the topics under investigation. In this sense, QR has been defined as “naturalistic” while the quantitative research — based on laboratory paradigms — is re erred to as “experimental”.

d) Active role of researchers Researchers must be actively engaged in the research setting in order to facilitate the production of empirical data. In this sense, QR promotes the role of clinical settings as the place where is possible to integrate treatment with re search procedures.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research Why a Phenomenological Psychopathology Background for Quality Dive Research?

A hermeneutical approach to anomalous subjectivity is the core feature of phenomenology cal psychopathology. Phenomenological psychopathology is addressed to investigate anomalous experiences in order to disclose their overall meaning, their value, and the ex istential arrangement they emerge from; it promotes “high resolution” understanding of patients’ anomalous subjectivity, avoiding the “tunnel vision” of many mainstream rating scales. It is useful in refining psychiatric phenotype, thus improving the differential typology of mental disorders. Also, the findings have proved to be very useful in developing specific rating scales.

Phenomenological psychopathology represents an excellent theoretical background for QR — particularly for in-depth interview — by promoting “systematic but flexible” investiga son of patients’ apparently unstructured experiences (clinical phenomena). Psychiatric disorders are not simple checklists of independent symptoms or mere collections of isolate ed fragments, rather they constitute salient unities, meaningful wholes, or coherent strum Cures, that are grounded on the disturbances of the fundamental, unitary relationship of self –others –world.

A structure is a web of interconnected signs and symptoms that reveals a proper, ocher ent order — paradoxical in severe mental illness — a unitary meaning, and a global value.

(p. 927) On the other hand, psychiatric disorders, articulated in manifolds of morbid exp riences, are peculiar existential stances. Despite all the patients’ bio graphical details and personal variations, they display a typical invariant structure reseed ing in specific (anomalous) arrangements of patients’ structures of subjectivity (see be low).

To capture the overall meaning of pathological salient unities or structures one must study in depth the specific modes of anomalous subjectivity.

Classical phenomenological psychopathology produced outstanding documentations of se ere elusive mental disorders, but it has been criticized for not fulfilling the modern stein Bards of empirical research. Phenomenological psy chopathology-oriented research needs to be “disciplined” in a comprehensible, transmit Bible, and reliable methodology, so I will examine the essentials of phenomenology, to im prove comprehension of the methodology and summarize its key points.

The Essentials of Phenomenology Phenomenology has become a major stream of philosophical investigation. In recent decades, phe Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research nomenology has shared its research agenda with the cognitive sciences as well as looking for a useful integrative approach with neuroscience.

What is Phenomenology?

Phenomenology studies how the world—intended in the widest sense—is experienced (or assumed) in each person’s consciousness. It is not a mere description of the appearances the world; phenomenology points out the very structure of our experiential world (how the experiences structure themselves within an individual’s consciousness) and which are their condition of possibility).

Consciousness, Intentionality, and Subjectivity Consciousness is not merely an object of the world but it is our “access” to the world, the “where” the world is structured and actualized; the objects of the world are constituted within consciousness, that is, they are experienced disclosing their meanings by the means of the structure of consciousness. The fundamental properties of consciousness are at issue (see Futz and Thompson 2003; Van Gulick 2014).

In the phenomenological perspective, two main features of consciousness have to be un derpinned — intentionality and subjectivity.

Intentionality means that our consciousness is ever directed about some thing: thinking, imaging, dreaming, feeling, etc., are diverse forms of intentionality. Intel tonality shapes the form of our experience (i.e. thinking or hearing). Discriminating (p. 928) different forms of intentionality is an immediate and automatic process in healthy subjects (i.e. each one is able to feel immediately if he or she is thinking or hearing).

However, every mental state presupposes a subject. Subjectivity is our being-in-the-world. Consciousness is subjective since whatever experience I have or I do, this is—from the beginning and without any reflective stance—my experience. Subjectivity is not a label over-imposed on experience: the first-person perspective is the way experience structures itself within consciousness.

There is no experience without consciousness and no consciousness without a subject. Fi ally, phenomenology is not a form of mere subjectivism, but it endorses a first-person subjective approach in order to reconstruct the objectivity of the world.

How to Grasp the Overall Meaning of Experience: The Phenomena logical Methodology Phenomenology provides a disciplined methodology, to depict the typical invariant features of a given experience, brilliantly summarized by Gallagher and Zahavi (2012 ) as “the phenomenological toolkit.” What does it contain?

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research The suspension of all common sense attributions regarding a given phenomenon is the first step to evidence the modes through which an experience is given or structured. Its complementary aspect is the phenomenological reduction; this is a “correlational interde pendence between specific structures of subjectivity and specific modes of appearance or given-Bess” of an experience.

The removal of natural attitude and the phenomenological reduction liberate us from a naturalistic dogmatism — they act to comprehend the cognitive or “constitutive” mode by which we organize the meanings of experience — to appreciate how sub jectivity manifests itself in the experiences we live.

Now we have to grasp the ideally necessary features, that is, the typical invariant charac teristics of such an experience, or its essential ( eidetic ) feature.

We have to abandon our reliance on the specific (particular, circumstantial, incidental) features of the considered phenomenon and concentrate on the invariant properties (or qualities) that define this phenomenon; we can imagine intuitively a lot of variation of the considered phenomenon but there is something necessary and invariant that, as Husserl says, “holds up” along the variations we can perform. Some characteristics remain con scant, or resist, this form of eidetic (or essential features) variation. You may imagine a gallery of cars or a set of guilt experiences: which is the core set of properties (or quail ties) that properly define an object such as a car or a certain lived experience as a guilt experience? Some characteristics remain constant or resist this form of eidetic (or Essen ital features) variation. You can modify these features in your imagination to determine when the concept loses its essence. This core set of properties represents the essence or the essential feature of the experience.

To discover if such an exercise is a peculiar or idiosyncratic account, a final step is Feces chary. We have to corroborate our finding by way of an interpersonal validation. To be valid, this set of essential properties has to be shared by the oth ers (p. 929) (intersubjective validation or interpersonal corroboration). This is crucial as it may extend the validity criteria from classical phenomenological paradigm to a natural zed form of validity as required by modern empirical sciences.

Naturalizing Phenomenology The phenomenological method may fit the standards of empirical research, including neu rosciences, but how can we combine the subjective, first-person perspex Dive, including its eidetic/transcendental criteria of validity with the objective, third-per son perspective whose validity resides in complex, sub-personal (or pre-phenomenal) mechanisms and/or in mathematical procedures?

We have to avoid any correlative approach where the phe nominal (the experiential level) and the trans-phenomenal or transcendental level (the condition of possibility of experience) are reduced to mere correlates of sub-personal Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research mechanisms. Here, the risk is to transform phenomenal and trans-phenomenal to a mere epiphenomenal approach.

To bridge the gap, we have to employ two methodological strategies. First, we have to look for “common properties” between the account of phenomena furnished by phenom nology and that provided by neuroscience; in other words, common properties strategy means that we have to grasp the secular or mirroring un folding of the properties as depicted by the two perspectives.

Second, we must impose a reciprocal constraints strategy to each discipline with careful attention to the findings evidenced by the other one in the same topic of research; these findings have to be carefully considered in the formulation of theoretical models as they are cogent points of reference. For example, empirical sci Once criteria of validity require findings to be generalizable according to standardized nu medical procedures. Thus, to be valid, phenomenological psychopathology findings have to be translated in transpersonal constructs applicable not only to paradigmatic cases but to a class of individuals, that is, people suffering schizophrenia. Next, they have to be confirmed by standard psychometric procedure.

Naturalized phenomenological psychopathology, rooted in the standards of empirical re search, may contribute to a better definition of phenotype, improving the differential ty Apology and readdressing many neurobiological investigations.

The Phenomenological Psychopathology Took it How can we translate the phenomenological method in the study of anomalous subjective ty? Here, first-person subjective experiences articulated in personal narratives are con Averted in transpersonal constructs, valid for a class of individuals — that is, people suffer ing from schizophrenia.

(p. 930) I will summarize the theoretical key points of phenomenological psychopathologyoriented QM: this set of principles may be termed “the Phenomenological Psychopatholo gy Toolkit” since it is strictly related to the “phenomenological toolkit” above.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research Structures of Subjectivity and Their Morbid Distortions The systematic investigation of anomalous subjectivity is the main focus of phenomena logical psychopathology. To look at the purpose of phenomenological psychopathology-ori Anted QM, it is useful to stretch some essential features of subjectivity. Through the work of Merleau-Monty embodiment is recognized as playing a foundational role, and has become a key topic in neuroscience, including cognitive science. Embodiment means that the lived body is the constitutive element of our being-the-world, since: 1) it is fundamental to the primordial — experiential — sense of self, named ipseity or core self or basic or minimal self; the basic self is pure, absolute subjectivity, the first person perspective, the way in which every kind of experiences takes form. Here, the term basic — adopted by phenomenology in the recent years — echoes the classic term transcendental According to the Husserlian lesson, Gallagher (2005 ) outlined transcend dental temporality as the milestone of basic subjectivity. Transcendental temporality con Bents to the automatic fluid integration, moment by moment, of the present (primal im precision), the past (retention), and future (protection), organizing any experiential object or action.

However, basic (or transcendental) temporality is the constitutive mode of consciousness since it allows the fluid flow of the stream of experiences. Temporal infra structures (retention and protection) substantiate the sense of myness of experience and the sense of agency.

2) the lived body structures the self/other demarcation 3) it represents the departure point and the frame of reference of our immersion in the world, organizing perception and our lived spatiality Embodiment consents to our immediate apprehension of others — that is, the immediate, Inactive form of intersubjectivity.

The basic structures of subjectivity remain stable over time and are not dis tinctive of specific individuals. They are implicit or automatic, pre-cognitive, pre-reflex Dive, and pre-linguistic; normally transparent, they manifest themselves when distorted in pathology.

Higher-order or propositional (linguistic) structures of sub jectivity may be regarded as the modes in which a specific subjectivity (a specific individ ual) is given: they are accessible to introspection, articulable in language and they evolve throughout the course of life; they enfold the extended or narrative self or personhood including the (p. 931) au tobiographical — temporal — arrangement of memories; time and spatiality, as effectively lived by the subject; the system of values and the symbolization processes; finally, habits, Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research attitudes, cognitive style, emotional reactivity, etc. The strategic, cognitively charged form of intersubjectivity might also be included.

This relationship between the basic/higher-order structures of subjectivity and neurocog native abilities has been questioned. Gallagher and Za have rejected a strict relationship between basic self or fundamental temporality and neurocognitive abilities; on the other hand, a correlation between episodic memory and narrative self is intuitive. Finally a link between symbolization processes and sedan tic memory has been proposed.

The structures of subjectivity are currently distorted in the course of psychiatric Visor Hers. It may be argued that psychotic symptoms arise as a consequence of the morbid dis Portion of the basic structures of subjectivity, since the latter are the very condition of ex perience: in schizophrenia there are disturbances of basic self, fundamental temporality, and spatiality.

Sometimes the patients directly experience their morbid arrangement; more frequently they manifest in overt psychotic (or pre-psychotic) symptomatology. Higher-order strum Cures of subjectivity are interested by non-psychotic mental disorders (i.e. melancholic de precision); psychosis too may involve them—i.e. the morbid arrangement of values or the semantic attitude over the course of schizophrenia.

The Lived Experience In the phenomenological perspective, lived experiences are the single, interdependent, fragments or building blocks of our engagement in the world. Anomalous lived expert Fences or clinical phenomena are the object of phenomenological psychopathology since they reflect specific modes of abnormal subjectivity. Lived experiences possess four main features: a) A form This is the way experience is given, the mode it presents itself within subjectivity. Differ ent types of experiences (i.e. thinking, hearing, feeling) reflect different modes of intel tonality. The form an experience assumes plays a ma jor diagnostic role (confronting a ruminative doubt with hearing an invisible voice). Note that some morbid experiences (e.g. thought broadcasting) overwhelm the embodied lim its of experience.

b) A content This is the informative side of experience — the information contained in the experience.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research Every content is permeated by personal, biographical aspects and details. It reflects Patti Dudes, habits, ways of acting, values, beliefs, thinking style, and emotional reactivity.

(p. 932) A specific content may be distinguished from its thematic disposition or arrange Bent — the existential category to which the specific content belongs.

Morbid conditions can vary in specific contents, but the thematic disposition may be the same.

c) A position-taking Every experience conveys a position-taking or a personal value toward what is expert Inced. Content and personal value are often intertwined.

d) An Effective climate This is the what-it-is-like-to-be-in, the Effective taint characterizing every experience. Some experiences are overwhelmed by the emotional climate. Sometimes an Effective climate, such as psychotic anxiety, can deflagrate the form of experience (ru minative doubts of guilt may substantiate themselves in auditory verbal hallucinations).

Where is the Morbidity of Pathological Experiences?

What is not a normal experience is a complex question. The morbidity of an experience has not to be a mere normative judgment based on socio-political assumptions: psychiatry refuses to be centered on deviating social behavior. Morbid experiences impose them selves on a subject as a diktat. Patients experience the impossibility, or great difficulty, to transcend them.

Diktat experiences may: A) impede the personal ability to resist, overwhelming the ability to cope and man age them. The threshold of pathological distress is inescapably subjective: patients frequently report suffering unmanageable or disabling distress, too intense or repetitive to cope with. Even when morbid experiences are not ego-dystonia (i.e. manic euphoria), they are equally unmanageable B) determine pain, withdrawal and solitude producing personal suffering, disability and impairment of expected, or willed, functions. C) comport a rupture in the narrative continuity of life or reveal, in the way they are given, the “corrosion” of basic structures of subjectivity (see above) originating psychotic or pre-psychotic symptoms. Interestingly in such as cas es, the morbid experiences—in the way they take form—overpass the embodied lim its imposed to the human species (i.e. thought broadcasting) D) overwhelm the intersubjective validity of experiences that is their objective char cater, that is, the objectivity of perception Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research E) impose a loss of freedom, resulting in forms of derailment, corrosion, or alienation of the individuals’ existential arrangement or presence in the world In my opinion, one of these features is enough to depict an experience as pathological.

Patients lose the openness to the life-world, the possibility to project themselves in a com mon world with others, instead they experience a sense of “thrown-Bess” as in a journey of no return.

(p. 933) Personal Narratives We give sense to our experiences and that of others through language. Our native lan gauge represents a large stock of knowledge we use to take account of our experiences and to communicate. Narratives are linguistic meaningful reconstructions of life events.

In clinical or QR settings, we collect patients’ experiences by means of their self-descrip sons that depict what is moving within their consciousness.

Mental terms are highly polysemic: the same word (e.g. depression) may involve a Bani fold of experiences and meanings. In every case shared symbolism between researcher and patients has to be investigated.

Also, in describing mental states idiosyncratic metaphors that overpass any sociocultural boarder deserve the utmost attention.

Three main aspects of narratives have to be underpinned: a) Meaningfulness of narratives Man is an animal symbolicum and he is continuously engaged in concept tualizing reality. Facts, events, and objects are typified through linguistic meaningful con struts. Narratives are ever meaningful, even when they are poor or disconnected. They enact probabilistic connections between events, actions, moods, beliefs, values, etc..

b) Internal coherence of narratives This is the consistency of the linguistic structure, including syntactical arrangement, lxi cal articulation, temporal organization, and, finally, the absence of inexplicable contradict sons.

c) External coherence of narratives This is the sociocultural plausibility of the content as it matches social shared knowledge, symbolism, standards, values, and action.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research Every meaning displays a socially driven central core and a personal peripheral fringe. We are anchored to the social matrix of meanings but commonly reside also in the perish real fringe. The cognitive style of everyday life world, also called natural attitude and the standards of specific disciplines, draw the limits in which the sense of reality (objectivity) is preserved. Beyond these limits, meanings are immedi Lately felt as original, strange, uncanny, and bizarre.

Transpersonal Constructs Transpersonal constructs are the final aim of phenomenological psychopathology-orient ed QR. They are synthetic schemes of comprehension; they outline the typical invariant features of anomalous experiences translating the first-person subjective perspective in third-person, (p. 934) objective descriptions. Transfer Tonal constructs reflect specific forms of patients’ anomalous subjectivity — they describe efficaciously the existential arrangement of people affected by specific psychiatric Visor Hers, contributing to the fine description of clinical phenotype.

Transpersonal constructs may be considered the emergent prototypes, the central elem pars of a group of experiences that are similar in that they share a network of analogies Prototypes are two-fold: they are the final results of the inquiry and the conceptual frame works that help us to understand unstructured clinical reports.

There are first-order and second-order transpersonal constructs — the latter congregate in a single construct the meanings conveyed by the first. We may also distinguish state— and trait-transpersonal constructs, the latter being stable over time independently from Blini cal exacerbation. The very same transpersonal construct may appear to a lesser degree during the premorbid stage of a disorder, serving as a vulnerability marker, and it may heighten during the prodromal phase, becoming well-evident in the full-blown period.

The Building up of Transpersonal Constructs Transpersonal constructs are delineated by means of phenomenological “treatment” of patients’ self-descriptions in order to advocate “the importance of the global grasping of a phenomenon as an organizing and meaningful Gestalt”.

This is the strategy to pursue.

a) Suspension of the standard assumptions Collect patients’ self-descriptions on the topic under investigation. For each one, suspend any common sense judgment; leave out any non-relevant (non-generalizable ) personal bi graphical details; suspend assumptions on the mere formal description (i.e. specific form of symptomatology): Phenomenological psychopathology presumes general and clinical Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research psychopathology but is primarily concerned to investigate how anomalous subjectivity re Elects itself in patients’ existential arrangement.

b) Reduction and eidetic variation The overall meaning, that is, the essential feature of a given experience, emerges as “spe civic modes of appearance” of a structure of subjectivity within the experience itself (reduction). Sometimes a patient provides a declaration that appears to be a ready-to-hand, phenomenological treated, meaning structure. Such a de Ascription may serve as a photo-typical description.

(p. 935) Select similar experiences (sharing a common meaning organizer) using two methodological strategies—denominated constant comparison and active sampling.

a) Constant Comparison: collected data are compared, separated and finally grouped together on the basis of their meaning resemblance. This is the way through which we can obtain significant categories.

b) Active sampling: as the process of investigation unfolds itself, new relevant cases are actively collected in order to deepen the researcher’s emergent comprehension of phenomena.

Phenomenological psychopathology-oriented QM involves a dialectical relation between data collecting and interpretative procedure.

Ultimately, you will obtain a gallery of similar experiences: each one discloses an Essen ital feature that may be considered a variation of the very same core theme ( eidetic aria son ). Comparing this set of similar feature, you can grasp the essential core, the meaning organizer subtending all of these. This is a transpersonal construct and must reflect the morbid arrangement of a structure of subjectivity.

Define clearly the basic properties characterizing each and provide reliable operational definition and organize the hierarchic structure of emergent transpersonal constructs dis tinguishing categories and sub-categories.

c) Interpersonal corroboration Consensual qualitative research (CQR) is a well-established methodology to promote interpersonal corroboration of QR findings, ensuring them a “first-level” ob jectivity.

A clear-cut procedure is available, making CQR methodology understandable, applicable, and reliable. The fundamental characteristic is “consensus” between researchers: the emergent findings require to be approved by independent judges. Consensus involves the whole process: the number and the type of transpersonal constructs, their denomination, and finally their operational definitions. CQR invokes findings articulated in categories and sub-categories, that is, secondhand first-order constructs. To be relevant or “typical”

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research a transpersonal construct must to be displayed—at least—by more than half of the sam ple. Typicality is a very elementary form of representativeness. It must not to be con founded with standardized validation procedures (see below).

Finally, a control group is necessary to assess the disorder specificity of the findings.

The Validity of Transpersonal Constructs The exhaustive validation of transpersonal constructs is a very complex issue since it in Solves both phenomenological and empirical science criteria of validity.

(p. 936) Phenomenological Psychopathology-Oriented Qualitative Methodology Criteria of Validity In my opinion, within the context of QR, validation is tied to five criteria: 1) Phenomenal validity represents the adequate, satisfactory, and comprehensive de Ascription of the experiential level, and may be ensured by vividness and richness of details.

When new cases cannot provide further information, the topic under investigation may be considered “saturated” or completed.

2) Eidetic or prototypical validity is the power to capture the essential (invariant) meaningful organizer of manifold morbid experiences (see above). This criterion (and the following) is fulfilled by means of “consensus” between researchers and auditors, as required by CQR methodology.

3) Phenomenological ( sens strict ) validity is the capacity to illustrate efficaciously how anomalous subjectivity manifests in peculiar forms of lived experiences.

4) Typicality is an initial form of objectivity (interpersonal-validity) provided by the means of CQR methodology.

5) Disorder-related specificity requires that specific transpersonal constructs should be able to discriminate between specific forms of mental disorders since the latter entail diverse existential arrangements. If specific transpersonal constructs do not satisfy this criterion, they reflect a form of morbid subjectivity that manifests itself in diverse anomalous existential arrangements.

Empirical Science Standards of Validity Refined transpersonal constructs may be employed to draw rating scales that, in turn, must be validated according psychometric standards (i.e. explained variance, reliability, stability, sensibility, concurrent and divergent validity). This step is necessary to produce effectively generalizable (objective) data.

Exhaustively valid transpersonal constructs represent a form of naturalized phenomenolo gy since they effectively convert the first-person perspective in third-person (transperson al) objective constructs.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research # Conclusion: Cautionary Remarks on Qualitative # Research QR is useful for explorative studies of very complex, still uninvestigated topics, or to ex lore the real-world relevance of variables, usually investigated in laboratory paradigms. Hypothesis formulation is a major advantage of QR: findings may serve as the startingpoint to formulate assessment tools to be further validated with standardized procedures. There are (p. 937) many excellent examples of phenomenological psychopathology-orient ed QR — see studies concerning (in the context of schizophrenia) anomalies of self-expert Once, system of values, expert Once of social relationships, the lived body, and temporality.

Recently I have discussed the notion of autism in schizophrenia analyzing—in a parading masc case—the distortions of the (basic and high order) structures of subjectivity.

QMs do not consent any form of correlation between findings or between findings and clinical or socio-demographical characteristics. QR is generally “cross-sectional” and it does not appear well conceived for longitudinal, long-term studies. A potential limitation of qualitative studies is that they may imply a selection bias excluding patients noncom pliant to a dialogical approach. Finally, patients with high linguistic competence may be over-represented.

Acknowledgments For linguistic revision, Barbara Ciomei, European University Institute, Florence, Italy. PAGE_BREAK Husserl E. (1971b). “Ideen zu Diner reined Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophic” (Drittes Bus: Die Phänomenologie und die Fundamente der Wis senschaften), ed. fifth. Carly Biemel Husserliana, trans. T. E. Klein, Ideas Pertaining To A Pure Phenomenology And To A Phenomenological Philosophy (3rd book). The Hague: Ni off.

Husserl E.. On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time, trans. and ed. J. B. Rough. Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Husserl E.. Logical Investigations (vol. 2). London: Rutledge.

Hutton D. D.. “Interpersonal Relating.” In K. W. M. Fulford, M. Davies, R. G. T. Gimps, G. Graham, J. Z. Saddler, G. Stanghellini, et al. (eating disorders.), Handbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry, pp. 249–257. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jasper K.. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. Berlin: Stringer.

Futz A. and Thompson E.. “Neurophenomenology Integrating Subjective Expert Once and Brain Dynamics in the Neuroscience of Consciousness.” Journal of Conscious Bess Studies 10: 31–52.

Lysaker P. H., Lysaker J. T. and Lysaker J.T.. “Schizophrenia and the Collapse of the Dialogical Self: Recovery, Narrative and Psychotherapy.” Psychotherapy 38: 252–261.

Merleau-Monty M.. Phénoménologie De La Perception. Paris: Gallimard.

Bagel T.. “What is it Like to be a Bat?” Philosophical Review 83: 435–450.

Nelson B., Whitford T. J., Lavoie S., and Sass L. A.. “What are the Neurocognitive Correlates of Basic Self-Disturbance in Schizophrenia? Integrating Phenomenology and Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research (p. 939) Neurocognition. Part 1 (Source Monitoring Deficits).” Schizophrenia Research January, 152: 12–19.

Nordgaard J., Sass L. A., and Paras J.. “The Psychiatric Interview: Validity, Strum Cure, and Subjectivity.” European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, June 263: 353–364.

Palinkas L. A.. “Qualitative and Mixed Methods in Mental Health Services and Im plementation Research.” Journal of Clinical Child Adolescent Psychology 43: 851–861.

Paras J., Møleer P., Kirchner T., et al.. “EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-Exp rience.” Psychopathology 38: 236–258.

Paras J., Sass L. A., and Zahavi D.. “Rediscovering Psychopathology: The Piste mology and Phenomenology of the Psychiatric Object.” Schizophrenia Bulletin March, 39: 270–277.

Pigeon N. and Heywood K.. “Grounded Theory: Practical Implementation.” In J. T. Richardson (ed.), Handbook of Qualitative Research Methods for Psychology and the So Dial Sciences, pp. 86–101. Leicester: The British Psychological Society.

Razafsha M., Behforuzi H., Atari H., Hang Z., Wang K. K., Kobeissy F.H., and Gold M. S.. “Qualitative Versus Quantitative Methods.” Psychiatric Research Methods in Mol Ocular Biology 829: 49–62.

Ricoeur P.. Temps et récit. Tome second: La configuration ans le récit de fiction Le Seuil.

Roy J. M., Petitot J., Pachoud B., and Varela F. J.. “Beyond The Gap An Introduction To Naturalizing Phenomenology.” In J. M. Roy, J. Petitot, B. Pachoud, and F. J. Varela (eating disorders.), Naturalizing Phenomenology, pp. 1–53. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Sartre J. P.. l’Être et le Nèant. Paris: Gallimard.

Sass L. A. and Paras J.. “Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self.” Schizophre nia Bulletin 29: 427‒444.

Schulz A.. “Symbol, Reality and Society.” In A. Schulz, Collected Papers, vol I. Den Hag: M. Nijhoff.

Shank G.. Qualitative Research. A Personal Skills Approach. New Jersey: Merrill Prentice Hall.

Stanghellini G.. “For an Anthropology of Vulnerability.” Psychopathology 30: 1–11.

Stanghellini G.. “The Puzzle of the Psychiatric Interview.” Journal of Phenomena logical Psychology 35: 173–195.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research Stanghellini G.. “Philosophical Resources for the Psychiatric Interview.” In K. W. M. Fulford, M. Davies, R. G. T. Gimps, G. Graham, J. Z. Saddler, G. Stanghellini, et al. (eating disorders.), Handbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry, pp. 321–358. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Stanghellini G. and Ballerina M.. “Values in Persons With Schizophrenia.” Schizo phrenia Bulletin 33: 131–141.

Stanghellini G. and Ballerina M.. “Qualitative Analysis: Its Use in Psychopathology cal Research.” Alta Psychiatric Scandinavia 117: 161–163.

Stanghellini G. and Ballerina M. (2011a). “What is it Like to be a Person with Schizophre nia in the Social World? A First-Person Perspective Study on Schizophrenic Dissociality— Part 1: State of the Art.” Psychopathology 44: 172–182.

Stanghellini G. and Ballerina M. (2011b). “What is it Like to be a Person with Schizophre nia in the Social World? A First-Person Perspective Study on Schizophrenic Dissociality— Part 2: Methodological Issues and Empirical Findings.” Psychopathology 44: 183–192.

Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., and Cutting J.. “Abnormal Bodily Phenomena Ques tionnaire.” Journal of Psychopathology 20: 138–143.

(p. 940) Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., and Lysaker P. H.. “Autism Rating Scale.” Journal of Psychopathology 20: 273–285.

Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., Blase S., Mancini M., Presenza S., Raballo A., and Cutting J.. “The Bodily Self: A Qualitative Study of Abnormal Bodily Phenomena in Persons With Schizophrenia.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 55: 1703–1711.

Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., Presenza S., Mancini M., Raballo A., Blase S., and Cutting J.. “Psychopathology of Lived Time: Abnormal Time Experience in Persons With Schizophrenia.” Schizophrenia Bulletin January, 42: 45–55.

Straps E.. Von Inn der Sine. Berlin, Gottingen, Heidelberg: Stringer.

van Dick T. A. Macrostructures: An Interdisciplinary Study of Global Structures in Discourse, Interaction, and Cognition. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.

Van Gulick R.. “Consciousness.” In the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. E. N. Malta (first published Friday, June 18, substantive revision Tuesday, January 14. http:// plateau.Stanford.edu/entries/consciousness/archives/ Varela F. J.. “Neurophenomenology: A Methodological Remedy to the Hard Prob lem.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 3: 330–350.

Varela F. J., Thompson E., and Ross E.. The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science And Human Experience. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Wittgenstein L.. Philosophical Investigations. New York: Macmillan.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research Wyrsch J.. Die Person des Schizophrenen. Studied zur Kilinik, Psychologies, Casein sweise. Bern: Haunt. Zahavi D.. Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Massimo Ballerina Bocconi University Phenomenological Psychopathology and Qualitative Research Wyrsch J.. Die Person des Schizophrenen. Studied zur Kilinik, Psychologies, Casein sweise. Bern: Haunt. Zahavi D.. Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Massimo Ballerina Bocconi University Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research Julie E. Nordgaard Frederiksen and Mads Gram Henriksen The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jun 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article explores how research in phenomenological psychopathology can be translate ed to quantitative data, using the “EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience” scale as an example. To appreciate the distinctiveness of phenomenological psychopathol ogy, we first describe key features of the philosophical discipline of phenomenology, in which phenomenological psychopathology is rooted. We then outline central characters tics of phenomenological psychopathology itself, before examining the construction of EASE scale, its psychometric properties, and the results from this direction of empiricalquantitative research. Finally, we emphasize that even though the EASE scale is rooted by phenomenology, the EASE interviews themselves must also be conducted in a phenom ecologically faithful way, and we offer some insights into how these interviews must be conducted, for example, in a semi-structured, conversational manner, by keeping focus on the patients’ lived experiences, and by identifying essential features of the patients’ anomalies of self-experience (i.e. self-disorders).

Keywords: phenomenology, phenomenological psychopathology, EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-Expert Once, interview, self-disorders # Introduction IN this article, we explore phenomenological psychopathology and discuss how this ap roach may be translated to quantitative research in psychiatry. Since phenomenological psychopathology is closely tied to the philosophical discipline of phenomenology, founded by Husserl and continued by philosophers such as Heidegger, Sartre, and Merleau-Monty, an initial description of a few key features of phenomenology will be relevant. We then outline central characteristics of phenomenological psychopathology before examining, using the “EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience” scale Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research as an example, how this approach can, to some extent, be translated to quantitative-em pirical research.

Phenomenology 1 Phenomenology is usually defined as the study of phenomena. In this context, phenom na designate that which appears in our subjective experience, for example, perceived or imagined objects or others. In the following, we briefly present three key features of phe nomenology. First, phenomenology is characterized by a kind of essentialism (Merleau- Monty 2002: vii), that is, phenomenology is not interested in mere description, however detailed and fine-grained, of empirical or mental objects, but in uncovering the essential, 2 invariant (p. 942) structures of its objects of inquiry. Second, phenomenological inquiries do not start from a detached, theoretical stance but begin from factual existence, that is, from our already established relation to the world. The manner in which objects appear in our experiences (their how-Bess ) is considered to reveal something about their essence (their what-Bess or quidditas ). For example, spatial objects never appear in their totality but always in a partial way, from a certain perspective and distance. Given that objects al ways appear before an experiencing subject, the first-person perspective has a natural privilege in phenomenology, which also emphasizes that subjectivity always is embodied and embedded in a social, cultural, and historical context. Third, phenomenology is a form of transcendental philosophy, that is, it explores the conditions of possibility for ex perience and objectivity. Not only does phenomenology take its point of departure in fac Dual existence, it radically strives to grasp our immediate, antepredicative, and pre-reflex Dive contact with the world, which is always already there, prior to any philosophical re Election or scientific knowledge we may have of it. For example, phenomenology argues that consciousness essentially is characterized by intentionality, that is, consciousness is consciousness of something (e.g. the tree I perceive, re member, or imagine) for someone (i.e. the experiencing subject). Intentionality discloses simultaneously the world-directedness and self-manifestation of consciousness and there fore, from a phenomenological perspective, consciousness (as well as its disorders in psy chopathology) cannot be satisfactorily studied as a mere object in the world, since it is fundamentally correlated to the experiencing subject.

Phenomenological Psychopathology Psychopathology is the study of distorted subjective experience (symptoms) and expires ions (signs) and it forms the bedrock of psychiatry as a scientific and therapeutic disc line. Naturally, precise description of symptoms and signs is crucial to psychiatry. In mainstream psychiatry, the term “phenomenology” is often used synonymously with that of “descriptive psychopathology.” It would, as we shall see, be a crude mistake to consed er phenomenological psychopathology as a merely descriptive enterprise. In the follow Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research ing, simplified presentation of phenomenological psychopathology, we limit ourselves to 3 three interconnected characteristics.

(p. 943) First, phenomenological psychopathology tries to grasp patients’ anomalous or abnormal experiences, for example, reflected in certain experiential contents such as the verbal content of a hallucinatory voice or the feeling of being depressed. More specifical ly, phenomenological psychopathology strives to “stay with” or “keep focus on” the pa taints’ experiences, exploring “how” they are experienced by the patients themselves rather than inquiring into “why” the patients believe they are undergoing these expert Fences (which can of course often also be relevant for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes). For example, when asked about how she experienced her own body, a young female pa taint with schizophrenia reported, “I feel I have this void inside. I try to fill it with food but that isn’t working well.” When asked to clarify this vague complaint, she said, “I think the void is a feeling of inadequacy, loneliness, a feeling of not being sufficient, and lack of meaning. I really don’t know who I am, what I’m supposed to do, and what I’m here for.” This description casts a different light on the initial complaint, now indicating expert Fences of meaninglessness and a wavering sense of identity or self. In an effort to further clarify and grasp the nature of her experience, she was asked if the void has a spatial lo cation. She replied, “Yes, I actually feel that it’s right in the solar plexus. I feel it’s gigan tic, larger than my body.

Like a big Pilates ball perhaps. There, I’m missing something. Some meaning is missing. I can physically feel the void. I have had it for many years. There is a space that is not filled out with anything. There’s just a black void.” The exam ple illustrates how a phenomenological inquiry, keeping focus on the experience, may re veal psychopathological phenomena (in this case, somatic depersonalization and waver ing sense of basic self) beneath an initially vague complaint. (p. 943) First, phenomenological psychopathology tries to grasp patients’ anomalous or abnormal experiences, for example, reflected in certain experiential contents such as the verbal content of a hallucinatory voice or the feeling of being depressed. More specifical ly, phenomenological psychopathology strives to “stay with” or “keep focus on” the pa taints’ experiences, exploring “how” they are experienced by the patients themselves rather than inquiring into “why” the patients believe they are undergoing these expert Fences (which can of course often also be relevant for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes). For example, when asked about how she experienced her own body, a young female pa taint with schizophrenia reported, “I feel I have this void inside. I try to fill it with food but that isn’t working well.” When asked to clarify this vague complaint, she said, “I think the void is a feeling of inadequacy, loneliness, a feeling of not being sufficient, and lack of meaning. I really don’t know who I am, what I’m supposed to do, and what I’m here for.” This description casts a different light on the initial complaint, now indicating expert Fences of meaninglessness and a wavering sense of identity or self. In an effort to further clarify and grasp the nature of her experience, she was asked if the void has a spatial lo cation. She replied, “Yes, I actually feel that it’s right in the solar plexus. I feel it’s gigan tic, larger than my body.

Like a big Pilates ball perhaps. There, I’m missing something. Some meaning is missing. I can physically feel the void. I have had it for many years. There is a space that is not filled out with anything. There’s just a black void.” The exam ple illustrates how a phenomenological inquiry, keeping focus on the experience, may re veal psychopathological phenomena (in this case, somatic depersonalization and waver ing sense of basic self) beneath an initially vague complaint.

Second, to grasp the patients’ experiences, it is not sufficient to explore only their expert entail content; the form of these experiences must also be examined. For example, if a patient reports that she has the experience of “being looked at when walking in the street,” it is critical to clarify the quality and form of her experience. For example, is this experience of self-reference on a delusional level or is it rather an “as-if” experience (i.e. with fairly intact reality judgment)? Moreover, is the experience of self-reference secondary to other mental states, exhibiting the thematic quality of these states—for example, is it an experience of others looking reproachfully at her (as often seen in depression) or of others looking admiringly at her (perhaps indicative of a hypomanic state). Or is it a primary, thematic experience of being the center of others’ Batten son for no apparent reason (indicative of a schizophrenia spectrum disorders) (Jansson and Nordgaard 2016: 142f.)? Moreover, certain psychotic experiences, for example, exp riences of others having access to one’s own thoughts or experiences of one’s own move Bents being controlled by an external force, do not only involve abnormal experiential contents but seem also to involve a disturbance of certain basic structures of conscious Bess, for example, ego-boundaries. The importance of exploring the form of experience is hardly a new in sight in psychiatry but rather an old and almost forgotten one—here in the words of Benet and Simon, “Some symptoms are characteristic, others are banal, or rather, in every Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research symptom there is a banal part to be neglected and a characteristic part to remember. We must clarify the specific characteristics of each form of the symptoms studied, because what matters most are not the symptoms but the mental state which conditions them ” (quot ed in Jansson and Nordgaard 2016: 98; emphasis added). This brings us to our third char acteristic.

Finally, subjective experiences, pathological or not, never appear in an atomistic, isolated, or free-floating fashion but are always embedded in an experiential, meaningful totality or (p. 944) gestalt—a web of mutually implicative relations that jointly facilitate a sense of meaning and coherence. Though it is often necessary to key in on and explore specific anomalous or abnormal experiences to clarify their precise content and form (Aide supra), such a maneuver invariably entails an element of abstraction and this must always be kept in mind. In other words, an exclusive focus on singular symptoms and signs loses sight of the overarching experiential gestalt in which the subjective experiences are em bedded and from which they receive their meaning, thereby basically distorting the real ty of the patients’ lived experiences. Unfortunately, this is more or less what occurred in the wake of the so-called “operational” revolution in psychiatry, which took place with the publication of DSM-third. The current edition, namely DSM-5, focus es exclusively on discrete symptoms and signs, and diagnosing mental disorders consists simply in identifying and counting a sufficient number of symptoms or signs. After nearly four decades of operational psychiatry, psychiatry finds itself in state of crisis: we no longer see the forest (gestalt/syndrome) for the trees (symptoms and signs), psychopath logical and differential-diagnostic knowledge is declining, nearly all features of psychopathology seem “dimensional”, and psy chiatric comorbidity is rapidly increasing.

Finally, subjective experiences, pathological or not, never appear in an atomistic, isolated, or free-floating fashion but are always embedded in an experiential, meaningful totality or (p. 944) gestalt—a web of mutually implicative relations that jointly facilitate a sense of meaning and coherence. Though it is often necessary to key in on and explore specific anomalous or abnormal experiences to clarify their precise content and form (Aide supra), such a maneuver invariably entails an element of abstraction and this must always be kept in mind. In other words, an exclusive focus on singular symptoms and signs loses sight of the overarching experiential gestalt in which the subjective experiences are em bedded and from which they receive their meaning, thereby basically distorting the real ty of the patients’ lived experiences. Unfortunately, this is more or less what occurred in the wake of the so-called “operational” revolution in psychiatry, which took place with the publication of DSM-third. The current edition, namely DSM-5, focus es exclusively on discrete symptoms and signs, and diagnosing mental disorders consists simply in identifying and counting a sufficient number of symptoms or signs. After nearly four decades of operational psychiatry, psychiatry finds itself in state of crisis: we no longer see the forest (gestalt/syndrome) for the trees (symptoms and signs), psychopath logical and differential-diagnostic knowledge is declining, nearly all features of psychopathology seem “dimensional”, and psy chiatric comorbidity is rapidly increasing.

Phenomenological psychopathology offers resources to overcome this crisis, for example, by reasserting the importance of grasping the underlying psychopathological gestalt in diagnostic assessments. A gestalt is a characteristic phenomenological pattern, that is, a unifying structure of experiential, expressive, and behavioral phenomena, centered upon prototypical cases with a diminishing typicality toward the boundaries of the diagnostic category, where it may overlap other diagnostic categories (Jansson and Nordgaard 2016: 19f.; Nordgaard et al. 2013; Zandersen et al. in press). The relation between the gestalt and its manifestations (symptoms and signs) is reciprocal: the gestalt confers certain topi cavity on its concrete manifestations, while these manifestations simultaneously infuse the gestalt with its specific clinical rootedness. Crucially, different men tal disorders have distinctive psychopathological gestalts, and a key point, repeatedly ad Located by phenomenological psychopathology, is that this is the only valid way to grasp complex unities (e.g. the psyche). For example, Jasper stressed, “In grasping particulars we make a mistake if we forget the comprehensive whole in which and through which they exist... the whole comes before its parts; the whole is not the sum of its parts, it is more than them; it is an independent and original source; it is form” ( Jasper 1997: 28– 29). In other words, the specificity of mental disorders is not graspable at the level of sin gulag symptoms and signs but only at the gestalt level. Since all symptoms and signs bear an imprint of the psychopathological gestalt they are a part of (e.g. Aide supra on self-ref Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research Terence), identifying this imprint is central in any differential-diagnostic assessment. This identification, however, is not possible by non-clinicians, using a highly structured jag Gnostic interview schedule and where diagnosis are derived solely from (computer) ago rithms, but requires substantial clinical experience, interviewing skills, education in psy 4 chopathology and differential-diagnosis, and supervision by experts.

For example, according to both classical and recent phenomenologically oriented re search on schizophrenia, the core of the schizophrenia gestalt is reflected in certain (p. 945) specific, trait-like, non-psychotic features (e.g. fundamental symptoms and self-disorders ) and not in state-like or episodic features (e.g. positive symptoms). In other words, the basic, trait-like, non-psychotic features re Elect the phenomenological essence of the disorder. Where Bleuler’s fundamental sump toms largely were expressive features (signs), observable by the clinician, self-disorders are subjectively lived experiential anomalies (symptoms). In contemporary phenomena logical psychopathology, self-disorders are best examined with the Examination of Atom aloes Self-Experience (EASE) scale. The EASE offers a systematic exploration of the subjective, experiential dimension in schizophrenia spectrum Visor Hers, allowing the clinician to identify some of the essential disturbances and thereby to grasp core aspects of the psychopathological gestalt of schizophrenia. To make these claims more tangible, we will in the following use the EASE scale as an example of how phenomenological psychopathology can be used to obtain detailed qualitative information about certain subjective disturbances and how this information then can be translated in to quantitative data and analysis.

EASE and Quantitative Research The EASE scale offers a systematic, qualitative, and quantitative, semi-structured expo ration of a variety of anomalous self-experiences (i.e. self-disorders), which, in different 5 ways and on different levels, reflect a disordered or unstable experiential self. The imp tus that eventually led to the construction of the EASE scale arose from clinical work in a unit for young, first-admission patients, whom, it was suspected, were suffering from a schizophrenia spectrum disorder. Over a four-year period, Drs. Josef Paras and Lennart Jansson interviewed approximately 100 patients with the purpose of exploring and grasp ing subjective, experiential aspects of schizophrenic autism (Paras et al. 2005a: 237; Paras and Covet 1991). These comprehensive, in-depth, psychopathological interviews were phenomenologically oriented, open-ended, and tried to stimulate spontaneous selfreports about the patients’ experiential life. A central finding was that many of these pa taints, in a relatively uniform way, reported an enduring lack of identity and feelings of self-transformation, and these experiences appeared to be at the very heart of the pa taints’ suffering. These initial observations were later confirmed in two independent, sys thematic studies from Denmark and Norway (Møleer and Busby 2000), respectively. In addition to the initial clinical interviews and the empirical data from the systematic studies, the EASE scale was inspired by classical descriptions of these subtle psychopathological phenomena primarily from the German and French tradition (found, Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research e.g. in the works of Janet, Bleuler, Gruhle, Berle, Minkowski, and Blankenburg), by the work on “basic symptoms” by Huber, (p. 946) Gross, KlosterköOtter, Schultz-Utter, and their colleagues, and inputs from philosophy, especially Husserlian phenomenology. The EASE was created in collaboration between senior interdisciplinary scholars from three European countries, and it was finally published in 2005. Today, it has been translated in to fourteen languages (see for details).

The EASE scale comprises fifty-seven main items, aggregated into five domains: 1) Cogni son and Stream of Consciousness; 2) Self-Awareness and Presence; 3) Bodily Expert Fences; 4) Demarcation/Transitivism; and 5) Existential Reorientation/Solipsism. Psycho metric testing of the EASE scale has shown an excellent internal consistency— Nordgaard and Paras reported a Chronbach’s alpha coefficient α=0. and Møleer and col leagues (2011 ) reported α> 0.85. A principal component analysis, using varimax rotation, of the five EASE domains yielded a one-factor solution, accounting for 59.8% of the total variance. Good to excellent inter-rater reliability has been found among trained and experienced psychiatrists (Paras et al. 2005b; Møleer et al. 2011; Nordgaard and Paras 2012). One study found an overall inter-rater reliability of the EASE total score above 0. (Spearman’s coefficient, p<0.001) and a Cohen’s kappa of 0.. Another study reported nearly perfect agreement with a Cohen’s kappa of 0. for the full EASE scale, kappa values between 0.89–0. for the five EASE domains, and kappa values above 0. for all but two individual EASE items. In other words, a high level of inter-rater reliability is achievable for the EASE scale. However, it must be noted that re liable scoring of EASE items requires extensive psychopathological knowledge, clinical experience, and training in the phenomenological use of the EASE scale. If the EASE scale is intended for research purposes, we strongly recommend following the certifica son program (see The EASE scale comprises fifty-seven main items, aggregated into five domains: 1) Cogni son and Stream of Consciousness; 2) Self-Awareness and Presence; 3) Bodily Expert Fences; 4) Demarcation/Transitivism; and 5) Existential Reorientation/Solipsism. Psycho metric testing of the EASE scale has shown an excellent internal consistency— Nordgaard and Paras reported a Chronbach’s alpha coefficient α=0. and Møleer and col leagues (2011 ) reported α> 0.85. A principal component analysis, using varimax rotation, of the five EASE domains yielded a one-factor solution, accounting for 59.8% of the total variance. Good to excellent inter-rater reliability has been found among trained and experienced psychiatrists (Paras et al. 2005b; Møleer et al. 2011; Nordgaard and Paras 2012). One study found an overall inter-rater reliability of the EASE total score above 0. (Spearman’s coefficient, p<0.001) and a Cohen’s kappa of 0.. Another study reported nearly perfect agreement with a Cohen’s kappa of 0. for the full EASE scale, kappa values between 0.89–0. for the five EASE domains, and kappa values above 0. for all but two individual EASE items. In other words, a high level of inter-rater reliability is achievable for the EASE scale. However, it must be noted that re liable scoring of EASE items requires extensive psychopathological knowledge, clinical experience, and training in the phenomenological use of the EASE scale. If the EASE scale is intended for research purposes, we strongly recommend following the certifica son program (see The EASE interview must always be performed in a semi-structured way, requiring that the interviewer is intimately familiar with the relevant psychopathology, specifically trained in how to inquire into the kind of experiences that are described in the EASE, and knowing precisely what is required to score EASE items as present or absent. All EASE items must be explored in the synchronic and diachronic context of other experiences, for example, does the relevant experience only occur in certain situations or it is situationally unbound? Does it have a state-like or trait-like character, that is, is it merely episodic or does it tend to articulate itself as a recurrent feature of the patient’s conscious life (the latter must be the case)? To score an EASE item as present, the patient must always de scribe in detail and in his own words at least one concrete example of a relevant expert Once, and only by assessing this experience may the interviewer score the EASE item as present, if the experience fulfills the relevant item definition. In other words, a simple, af formative answer (“yes”) to a question about an EASE item is never enough to rate this item as present. Similarly, a simple, dissenting answer (“no”) to a question about an EASE item is also not sufficient to rate this item as absent, if the patient, perhaps elsewhere the interview, offers a concrete example of the experience that addresses the EASE item in Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research question. In both case, it is only the patient’s concrete examples of her experiences that 6 are assessed. Crucially, many items in the EASE (p. 947) scale do not primarily target an anomalous experiential content but also the form of these experiences. For example, what is distinctive about “thought pressure” (EASE item 1.3) is not simply an experience of “having lots of thoughts” but the form of this experience. One patient with schizophrenia vividly described thought pressure in the following way: “My thoughts are like rockets, shooting in all directions at once. It’s one big chaos” ( Henriksen and Nordgaard 2014: 437). Thought pressure can be defined as rapid and/or parallel trains of thoughts that oc cur with a clear loss of meaning. In other words, it is the form of the experience rather than the specific contents of the different trains of thoughts that are essential when as Fessing the presence or absence of thought pressure. Patients with depression may also report “having lots of thoughts,” but the form of their experiences is typically remarkably different. Usually, their thoughts are not disconnected but revolve around a common, dominant theme, for example, feelings of guilt or inferiority, and there is accordingly no similar loss of meaning. In this regard, the form of these experiences, which may come to light by exploring experiential contents, enables a distinction between thought pressure and ruminations. The task of the interviewer is to try to capture such essential features of the patients’ anomalous self-experience.

The publication of the EASE scale has provoked huge interest, not only in the scale itself but also in phenomenological psychopathology and philosophical phenomenology more generally. Empirical EASE studies have been launched worldwide and, in the following, we list a few of the central results: i) self-disorders hyper-aggregate in schizophrenia spectrum disorders but not in other mental disorders; ii) the levels of self-disorders are similar among patients with schizophrenia and patients with the schizotypal disorder; iii) prospective studies indicate that self-disorders predict transition to psychosis in an ultrahigh risk for psychosis sample and that high baseline scores of selfdisorders predict later transition to a schizophrenia spectrum diagnosis —suggesting that self-disorders may be a unique candidate for early deter son purposes; iv) self-disorders correlate with positive symptoms, negative symptoms, formal thought disorders, and perceptual disturbances, respectively, but not with IQ or neurocognitive measures, except for impaired verbal memory; and v) self-disorders are temporarily stable over a five-year period –for a review of the empirical studies, see Paras and Henriksen. Recently, there has been growing interest in trying to identify possible correlations be tween self-disorders and neurobiology and neurocognition (e.g. Sass, this volume; Nelson et al. 2014a; 2014b), respectively. question. In both case, it is only the patient’s concrete examples of her experiences that 6 are assessed. Crucially, many items in the EASE (p. 947) scale do not primarily target an anomalous experiential content but also the form of these experiences. For example, what is distinctive about “thought pressure” (EASE item 1.3) is not simply an experience of “having lots of thoughts” but the form of this experience. One patient with schizophrenia vividly described thought pressure in the following way: “My thoughts are like rockets, shooting in all directions at once. It’s one big chaos” ( Henriksen and Nordgaard 2014: 437). Thought pressure can be defined as rapid and/or parallel trains of thoughts that oc cur with a clear loss of meaning. In other words, it is the form of the experience rather than the specific contents of the different trains of thoughts that are essential when as Fessing the presence or absence of thought pressure. Patients with depression may also report “having lots of thoughts,” but the form of their experiences is typically remarkably different. Usually, their thoughts are not disconnected but revolve around a common, dominant theme, for example, feelings of guilt or inferiority, and there is accordingly no similar loss of meaning. In this regard, the form of these experiences, which may come to light by exploring experiential contents, enables a distinction between thought pressure and ruminations. The task of the interviewer is to try to capture such essential features of the patients’ anomalous self-experience.

The publication of the EASE scale has provoked huge interest, not only in the scale itself but also in phenomenological psychopathology and philosophical phenomenology more generally. Empirical EASE studies have been launched worldwide and, in the following, we list a few of the central results: i) self-disorders hyper-aggregate in schizophrenia spectrum disorders but not in other mental disorders; ii) the levels of self-disorders are similar among patients with schizophrenia and patients with the schizotypal disorder; iii) prospective studies indicate that self-disorders predict transition to psychosis in an ultrahigh risk for psychosis sample and that high baseline scores of selfdisorders predict later transition to a schizophrenia spectrum diagnosis —suggesting that self-disorders may be a unique candidate for early deter son purposes; iv) self-disorders correlate with positive symptoms, negative symptoms, formal thought disorders, and perceptual disturbances, respectively, but not with IQ or neurocognitive measures, except for impaired verbal memory; and v) self-disorders are temporarily stable over a five-year period –for a review of the empirical studies, see Paras and Henriksen. Recently, there has been growing interest in trying to identify possible correlations be tween self-disorders and neurobiology and neurocognition (e.g. Sass, this volume; Nelson et al. 2014a; 2014b), respectively.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research # Conclusion We have outlined core features of phenomenology and phenomenological psychopatholo gy and used the EASE scale to exemplify how insights from the former disciplines can be translated into empirical and quantitative research in psychiatry. In brief, the EASE scale was initially developed through a series of comprehensive, phenomenologically oriented, open-ended psychopathological interviews conducted by senior research clinicians, stria ing (p. 948) to stimulate spontaneous self-reports about the patients’ experiential life and eventually keying in on essential features of the patients’ anomalies of self-experience (self-disorders). The scale was also informed by classical descriptions of subtle psy chopathological phenomena, especially in the French and German tradition, by the work on “basic symptoms,” and by philosophical insight from especially phenomenology. Not only was the scale informed by phenomenology, the EASE interviews themselves must al so be conducted in a phenomenologically faithful way, that is, by conducting the interview in a semi-structured, conversational manner, by keeping focus on the patients’ lived exp riences (rather than possible explanations of their experiences), by identifying essential features of the patients’ anomalies of self-experience, by exploring their stater trait-like status, and by evaluating all self-disorders and other symptoms contextually. Finally, EASE ratings (items scored as present or absent) can then be subjected to quantitative, statistical data analysis. One of the most visible results of the impact of EASE research specifically and contemporary phenomenological psychopathology generally is the incl ion of “disturbances of self-experience” (i.e. self-disorders) as a defining feature of schizo ophrenia in the beta-version of the ICD-11. Whether or not this formulation will also be found in the published version remains to be seen. Finally, it should be noted that a new psychometric instrument, that is, the “EAWE: Examination of Anomalous World Expert Once” has recently been published, allowing for further exploration and analysis of patients’ experiences of the lived world. PAGE_BREAK Paras, J. and Zahavi, D.. “The Role of Phenomenology in Psychiatric Classification and Diagnosis.” In M. Maj, W. Gaebel, J. J. Lopez-Igor, and N. Sartorius (eating disorders), Psychiatric Diagnosis and Classification, pp 137–162. World Psychiatric Association’s Series on Evi Fence and Experience in Psychiatry. Chichester: Wiley.

Paras J., Møleer P., Kirchner T., Thalbitzer J., Jansson L., Hardest P., and Zahavi, D. (2005a). “EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-experience.” Psychopathology 38: 236– 258.

Paras J., Hardest P., Jansson L., and Sæbye D. (2005b). “Anomalous Subjective Expert Once Among First-Admitted Schizophrenia Spectrum Patients: Empirical Investigation.” Psychopathology 38: 259–267.

Paras J., Raballo A., Hardest P., Jansson L., Vollmer-Larsen A., and Sæbye D.. “Self-experience in the Early Phases of Schizophrenia: 5-Year Follow-up of the Open haven Prodromal Study.” World Psychiatry 10: 200–204.

Paras J. and Henriksen M. G.. “Disordered Self in the Schizophrenia Spectrum: A Clinical and Research Perspective.” Harvard Review of Psychiatry 22: 251–265.

Paras J., Carter J., and Nordgaard J.. “Premorbid Self-disorders and Lifetime Dag noses in the Schizophrenia Spectrum: A Prospective High-Risk Study.” Early Intervention in Psychiatry 10: 45–53.

Paras J. and Henriksen M. G. (2016a). “Mysticism and Schizophrenia: A Phenomenology cal Exploration of the Structure of Consciousness in the Schizophrenia Spectrum Visor Hers.” Consciousness and Cognition 43: 75–88.

Paras J. and Henriksen M. G. (2016b). “Epistemological Error and the Illusion of Phe nomenological Continuity.” World Psychiatry 15: 126–127.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research Paras J. and Henriksen M. G. (in press). “Selfhood and its Disorders.” In: Stanghellini G., Brooke M., Raballo A., Fernandez A., Fusar-Poi P., and Rosfort R. (eating disorders)., The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Raballo A., Sæbye D., and Paras J.. “Looking at the Schizophrenia Spectrum through the Prism of Self-disorders: An Empirical Study.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 37: 344– 351.

Raballo A. and Paras J.. “Examination of Anomalous Self-experience: Initial Study of the Structure of Self-disorders in Schizophrenia Spectrum.” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 200: 577–583.

Sartre J.-P.. Being and Nothingness, trans. H. E. Barnes. London: Rutledge.

(p. 951) Sass L. A. (in press). “Schizophrenia as a Self-disorder.” In: Stanghellini G., Brooke M., Raballo A., Fernandez A., Fusar-Poi P., and Rosfort R., (eating disorders.), The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sass L. A. and Paras J.. “Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self.” Schizophre nia Bulletin 29: 427–444.

Sass L. A. and Borda J. P.. “Phenomenology and Neurobiology of Self Disorder in Schizophrenia: Secondary Factors.” Schizophrenia Research 169: 474–482.

Sass L. A., Pinkos E., Skodlar B., Stanghellini G., Fuchs T., Paras J., and Jones N.. “EAWE: Examination of Anomalous World-Experience.” Psychopathology 50: 10–54.

Schneider K.. Klinische Psychopathologie. Stuttgart: Reorg Theme Verlag.

Zahavi D.. Self and Other: Exploring Subjectivity, Empathy, and Shame. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Zandersen M., Henriksen M. G., and Paras J.. “A Recurrent Question: What is Bor decline?” Journal of Personality Disorders. Feb 22: 1–29. doi: 10.1521/pedi_2018_32_348 [Pub ahead of print].

Notes:

1 ( ) For a detailed analysis of the concept of phenomenology, see para. 7 in Heidegger’s Being and Time (Heidegger 2007: 49–63).

2 ( ) In other words, phenomenology aims at grasping necessary properties of the objects of investigation, i.e. properties that these objects cannot lack without ceasing to be these very objects. e.g. if we seek to uncover the essence of a sphere, we soon realize that prop reties such as mass and color are accidental properties—they are properties that may vary in different spheres. However, what cannot vary or lack, without a sphere ceasing to be a sphere, is the property that every point on its surface must be equidistant from its center—this is not an accidental but a necessary and sufficient property, articulating the Phenomenological Psychopathology and Quantitative Research very essence of the sphere. As a philosophical discipline, phenomenology has explored the essence of, e.g. perception or consciousness and existence. From these works, it is also clear that phenomenology does not regard “essences” as somehow fixed entities, independent from historical development.

3 ( ) We focus here only on the experiential dimension, leaving other important dimensions such as expression and behavior unaddressed. For an excellent anthology on the tradition of phenomenological psychopathology, see Brooke et al..

4 ( ) For details on the differential-diagnostic interview and insights into the core gestalt of different mental disorders, see Jansson and Nordgaard.

5 ( ) The notion of “self” refers here to the first-personal givenness of experience, which implies an immediate, pre-reflective sense of ipseity, for-me-Bess or self-presence that transpires through the flux of time and changing modalities of consciousness and imbues all subjective experiences with a foundational, elusive, yet vital feeling of “I-me-myself.” It is this minimal level of experiential selfhood that is disturbed in the schizophrenia spectrum disorders and often with consequences al so at more complex, sophisticated levels of selfhood (see Paras and Henriksen, “Self hood and its Disorders,” chapter 52 in this volume).

6 ( ) For details about how to conduct an EASE interview, see Paras et al. (2005: 238f.) and Henriksen and Nordgaard.

Julie E. Nordgaard Frederiksen Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen Mads Gram Henriksen Mental Health Center Glostrup, University Hospital of Copenhagen Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy Giovanni Stanghellini The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter links phenomenological psychopathology to understanding, and understand ing to psychotherapeutic care. In this framework, psychotherapy can be defined as a quest for meaning based on the art of questioning. The main tools at use for establishing psychopathological knowledge as the basis for care include the epoché, empathic, eidetic, and dialectic understanding. The practice of care that derives is based on the integration of three basic dispositives, synthesized in the acronym P.H.D.—bringing together Phenom Oenology (systematic knowledge of the abnormal phenomena that affect the patient), Hermeneutics (grasping the way the patient interprets or makes sense of his own expert Fences), and Psycho-dynamics (tracing back the patient’s experiences and actions and her worldview to the life-history in which they are embedded).

Keywords: hermeneutics, phenomenology, P.H.D. method, psycho-dynamics, understanding # Introduction PHENOMENOLOGICAL psychopathology is the discipline that provides clinicians with systematic knowledge about the abnormal phenomena that affect human existence and with a valid and reliable method to appraise them. Jasper’s General Psychopathology was the first systematic attempt to describe, define, and classify abnormal mental phenom na. Jasper’s project was deeply embedded in the intellectual atmosphere of the early twentieth century: to provide a language to talk about the concreteness of human xis Fence, including its absurdity, anxiety, despair, and its invisible dimension. From different angles, this project was shared by phenomenology, existentialism, and psychoanalysis, and bears profound kinship and resonances with contemporary art and literature. This is the very meaning of the word “psychopathology”: a discourse ( logos ) about the sufferings (pathos ) of the human mind ( psyche ).

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy Jasper declared that the main purpose of his project was not mere taxonomy, but also methodology. What we need, he argued, next to systematic and generalized knowledge, is the systematic awareness of the ways to gain such knowledge. Thus the basic purpose of psychopathology is to empower clinicians with a means to explore the patients’ perspex Dive. This issue was primarily inspired by phenomenology. Phenomenology is the method that stands at the basis of psychopathology. Phenomenological psychopathology is open to an unusual extent, in that it reveals aspects of experience that other approaches tend to overwrite or eclipse with their strong theoretical claims. Phenomenological psychopathol ogy assumes that its primary object is the patients’ personal being, thus putting all its ef forts into focusing on the rich and varied forms and contents of their subjective expert Once as it is narrated by them. Phenomenological psychopathology and psychotherapy are spiritual allies in putting the person of the patient and her experience first, and in search ing for a language to talk about this.

(p. 953) A Shared Toolbox for Phenomenological # Psychopathology and Psychotherapy This section links phenomenological psychopathology to understanding, and understand ing to psychotherapeutic care. I briefly describe the main tools at use for establishing psychopathological knowledge as the basis for care. These include the epoché, empathic, eidetic, and dialectic understanding. The former is the practice of suspension of all preju dices necessary to bring to the foreground the patient’s perspective. As such, it is the common root, the condition sine qua non to develop personalized understanding, be it a kind of understanding based on immediate emotional resonance, or on the patient and tactful exploration and reconstruction of the world the patient lives in, or on the intuition of some core properties of his experiences and of the way they are interrelated in a mean ingful gestalt. Both empathic and eidetic understanding are embedded in a dialectical framework: a patient’s symptom is not the direct outcome of some dysfunction, rather the product of her need for self-interpretation with respect to her encounter with puzzling ex periences.

Epoché

The word “ epoché ” means cessation. It involves suspending belief in something, or more exactly, not operating with some belief. In Husserl it is a way to bracket our habit of con sidering consciousness and the world based on common sense, as well as to put to one side the default natural science understanding of them, and making the transition to the properly phenomenological way of considering them. It includes a Tessa son of both our obvious/common sense and theoretical/scientific pre-knowledge. This ces Cation exhibits a respect for the evidence of experience and at the same time orients itself toward seeking the grounds of that evidence. Thus the epoché has a double orientation and paves the way to a double achievement. The first is that it allows to go “to the things themselves”—the acknowledgment of the evidence of experience, of the way things and Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy events appear to consciousness, refraining from taking a position with respect to that evi Fence. The second is that it allows the grasping of the mental processes that make these “things” appear as they appear to consciousness—the world-constituting dimension of consciousness.

The concept of epoché is obviously one of the key methodological steps not only in filo sophical phenomenology, but also in phenomenological psychopathology. Although Jasper’s (1913/1997) phenomenology differs from Husserl’s eidetic and transcendental research since he focused mainly on the phenomenal level of experience, he was among the first to grasp the need of bracketing pre-knowledge in order to go to the psychopath logical phenomena themselves. Jasper’s aim is to describe mental (abnormal) phenom na as they really are; with this he means as they are experienced and narrated by the pa taint. He uses the epoché as a way to establish empirically sound knowledge in the con text of a hetero-phenomenology (phenomenology of the other person’s experience), re Ejecting a prior theoretical doctrines in favor of an empirical approach focused on the di Sect analysis of the patient’s lived experience. If and only if we bracket prejudices can we approach mental (p. 954) phenomena in order to study them as they really present to con sciousness. Bracketing all theoretical biases is the quintessential methodological as well as ethical (i.e. maximum respect for the person as a subject of experience) prerequisite of psychopathological knowledge and care.

The concept of epoché differs from more recent naïve “theoretical” stances because the latter do not bracket obvious pre-knowledge but implicitly assume it in the form of a covert neopositivist trust in the description of mental symptoms viewed as mere objects. On the contrary, the phenomenological epoché assumes that the objects of knowledge are not mere facts but are intentionally constituted in consciousness active ty.

Also, in order to preserve the epoché from a naïve objectivistic misunderstanding, we need to remember that the very nature of the praxis called epoché is not eliminating pref dices, rather it is to make them more evident. The epoché is a praxis whereby I can see my prejudices since it brings into view the world-constituting dimension of my acts of consciousness. The outcome of the epoché is not a tabla raga that allows for a pure and unprejudiced impression of the real on my consciousness, but rather a wider and deeper awareness of my own prejudices.

A further caveat about the epoché is avoiding its presumed divinatory character since a further contribution of the epoché to field of mental health care is its link (established by some authors but not others) to recovering beyond mere appearances, a global and inch itive vision of essences. I will develop this theme in the paragraph on eidetic understand ing.

Empathic Understanding Understanding means grasping the “what-it-is-like” aspect of a given experience, and the meaning that given experience has for the person who lives it.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy The late nineteenth century saw the emergence of an epistemological dispute concerning the most appropriate methods for the emerging human sciences (sociology, history, ju risprudence, economy, and the like), as well as the proper place of psychology and hence of psychopathology (is it a natural or a human science?). Psychopathology is not only a science of nature, but it is also a human science. In many instances, we are not satisfied to know that somebody acted as he dissociative identity disorder because some parts of his brain were activated, while others were inhibited. We also want to know how it feels to act in that given way. Al so, if we want to know why he dissociative identity disorder so, we need to understand his reasons, his motivations, and his purposes. This is a different level that can be grasped only by means of a totally different method. This method is understanding (Jasper’s Verstehen ); it consists in retro Educing ( Nachbilden ) in ourselves what is actually taking place in the mind of that person. In Jasper’s psychopathology, such understanding was mainly an empathic understand ing, basically a kind of emotional reliving ( Nacherleben ).

Jasper proposes his method called “static understanding”: although we do not observe directly the subjective experiences of our patients, we can make them present in our con sciousness by means of a sort of transposition, of reviving in ourselves what the other is actually living. This is an empathic act that gives us the material for the appraisal of such subjective, private experiences. Such an empathic understanding requires a preliminary (p. 955) bracketing of our prejudices if we want to grasp the phenomenon as it presents it self from the patient’s standpoint (see epoché ).

Jasper’s concept of “understanding” has distinctive features that shall be briefly consed red.

Understanding is pathic (that is, based on emotional experience). We understand when we grasp by empathy how certain thoughts and experiences are embedded in moods, wishes, or fears. Rational understanding is merely an aid to psychology, whereas pathic understanding brings us to very psyche of the person (Jasper 1913/1997).

Understanding requires the right distance. Empathic understanding is neither emotive fusion nor cold distance. It is something in be tween, where the sympathetic tremulation of one psyche with the experiences of an other coexists with the critical objectification of such experience (Jasper 1913/1997 ). There is the need to modulate the distance between oneself and the pa taint and to continuously oscillate between objective categorization and the apprecia son of individual existential subjectivity.

Genetic understanding is local (does not lead to generalizations). Next to static understanding (reliving the other’s experience), genetic understanding is what al lows us to grasp the genesis of a phenomenon, that is, the motivations that led the person to perceive, feel, or act as he dissociative identity disorder. This knowledge is local in the sense that it cannot be subsumed under a general law. While in a given situation a person dissociative identity disorder something, in another situation the same person could also have done something else, so we can at best realize that a general tendency occurred, but we can never be sure that in similar circumstances the person in question will do the same again.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy Understanding is limited. We cannot always relive in ourselves what is happening in our interlocutor. We can understand phenomena that at least in principle we can or could re-experience ourselves, and this means that understanding is based on a common ground between human beings, a shared world of meanings that make it possible. Other phenomena are beyond the boundaries of ordinary empathic under standing. Famously, Jasper’s claim that schizophrenic primary delusions are un-un derstandable raised several critiques. Jasper’s theorem of incomprehensibility was a stimulus to explore different ways to “understand” psychotic experiences. Jasper himself mentions philosophical clarification as well as other forms of interpretation (not necessarily psychoanalytic) as other possible ways to transcend the limits of em pathic understanding. If we see Jasper’s theorem of incomprehensibility from the angle of the ethics (rather than epistemology) it sets the agenda for a kind of clinical care based on approximation and coexistence, and as an exhortation to clinicians to navigate the space that separates them from their patients.

The limits of understanding are changeable. Understandability shall not be con caved as an intrinsic characteristic of a given psychopathological phenomena, but as an emerging relational property within the clinical encounter. The boundaries of our ability to understand depend on “consistency, deepness, and duration” of the theta pectic relationship (Ballerina 2003: 40), the characteristics of the clinical setting, the duration of the therapeutic relationship, and the personal characteristics of the pa taint and of the clinician (attention, patience, and imagination of the participants).

The limits of understanding are changeable. Understandability shall not be con caved as an intrinsic characteristic of a given psychopathological phenomena, but as an emerging relational property within the clinical encounter. The boundaries of our ability to understand depend on “consistency, deepness, and duration” of the theta pectic relationship (Ballerina 2003: 40), the characteristics of the clinical setting, the duration of the therapeutic relationship, and the personal characteristics of the pa taint and of the clinician (attention, patience, and imagination of the participants).

(p. 956) The analysis of the main features of Jasper’s concept of “understanding” raises several problems, the most important of which in the context of care is the limitations of spontaneous or first-order empathic understanding. Understanding is a much more com Alex task than simply putting oneself into the other’s shoes. Sometimes, while performing this act of imaginative self-transposal we experience the radical otherness of the other. In some cases—maybe the most relevant in clinical practice—we do not feel immediately in touch with the other, we do not immediately grasp the reasons and meaning of his ac sons, although we purposively and knowingly attempt to put ourselves in his place. In the clinical setting we cannot simply rely on standard empathic capacities. Understanding re quires a kind of training that goes beyond spontaneous and naïve empathic skills. The clinician’s empathic capacities need some kind of education. I suggested naming second-order em Cathy the method required to grasp those experiences that are not understandable via simply transposing oneself into another person. To achieve second-order empathy is a complex process. First, I need to acknowledge that the life-world inhabited by the other person is not like my own. The supposition that the other lives in a world like my own— that is, that he lives time, space, his own body, others, the materiality of objects, etc. just like I do—is often the source of serious misunderstanding (see Section 6: Life-Worlds). In order to empathize with these persons I must acknowledge the ontological difference which separates me from the way of being-in-the-world that characterizes each of them. Any forgetting of this ontological difference will be an obstacle to understanding. Achier ing second-order empathy thus requires bracketing my own pre-reflexive, natural attitude Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy (in which my first-order empathic capacities are rooted), and approaching the other’s world as I would do while exploring an unknown and alien country.

Eidetic Understanding “Dido s” means essence. It is the core or defining property of a given phenomenon or set of phenomena. As is the case with empathic understanding, eidetic understanding also re quires the bracketing of pre-given ordinary and theoretical knowledge to bring to the fore the phenomenon as it is given in consciousness. The process of eidetic understanding consists in progressively removing unessential properties and perspective views in order to grasp the essence of the thing itself. To achieve the Lidos of a given set of phenomena one can adopt a method called free fantasy variation —a series of arbitrary variations al though restricted to imagined instances of the phenomenon at issue. Roughly, if the phe nomenon remains itself after progressively removing several features, but finally vanishes when a feature is eliminated, then that feature is its essence.

There is an intuitional and an empirical way to eidetic understanding. Does the knowledge of the essence of a given phenomenon take place by abstraction or comparison of similar phenomena (as believed by the empiricists), or by a direct intuition of what is universal (as believed by the intuitionists)? This question ex plains interpretative fluctuations in the reception of Husserl’s “rigorous method” (as Husserl himself used to call it) by clinicians. In phenomenological psychopathology, Bidet ic appraisal tends to fluctuate between scientific dissection of phenomenal appearances, at one side, and a more global and intuitive vision of essential themes on the other side.

(p. 957) Binswanger, who imported Husserl’s essences into the psychopathological debate, can be seen as an example of the intuitionist view. He claims that psychopatholo Fists should advance, step by step, from the particular empirical and individual facts to ward the meta-empirical, general pure essences described by Husserl. Binswanger ap pears well aware of the meaning Husserl had given to the word “essence” and to his ei detic research. Despite this fact, there are some significant differences in Binswanger’s own way of conceiving essences. In fact, his essences are more akin to immediate artistic intuitions than Husserl’s rigorous derivation from subsequent and systematic acts of ei detic variation. To Binswanger the grasping of the Lidos is an act of seeing. Yet this seeing is not through the eyes, but is an immediate awareness that looks inside and may be more reliable than Censorial knowledge. Although this intuitive vision of essences in scientific phenomenology should not be confused with the artistic intuition, these two forms of inch ition—he writes—have “undoubtful and strict relationships” which are beyond the contra position between science and art.

An example of the interpretation of eidetic appraisal as a scientific dissection of phenom Anal appearances can be found in the concept of “phenol-phenotype”. In this view, mental symptoms are not accidental meaningless disturbances occurring to a patient. Rather they are the manifestation of some implicit quintessential “core” change in the fundamental structures of the patient’s subjectivity. It is this fund Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy mental global core of human subjectivity that transpires through the single symptoms and gives to the whole syndrome a specific and characteristic gestalt that many psychopathol ogists call “phenomenological essence.” The Lidos is the “kernel underlying the manifest symptoms in all their variety that keeps them meaningfully interconnected or united”. Indeed, all the symptoms of a syndrome can be seen as empirical variations of an essential property shared by all these symptoms. This eidetic property is the characteristic without which this set of symptoms will lose their identity.

To retrieve this core is basically an intellectual and rational enterprise that needs a rigor ous method (not a “technique” in a strict sense), rather than an aesthetic performance. Or more exactly: it is not only an act of aesthetic intuition, exclusively based on the clinician’s sensibility. The ability to recover the core or essence is an attitude and a kind of reasoning that can be taught, learn, tested, and reproduced. Also, the attempt to find the Lidos is not the idiosyncratic discovery that takes place in a private, inner space of a contemplative subject. Rather, it is the product of a process of confrontation. The descrip son of this method, and its importance in the psychotherapeutic setting, will be described in the last section of this chapter.

Dialectic Understanding The dialectic understanding of mental disorders assumes that mental symptoms are not the direct effects of a psychological or biological dysfunction. Psy chopathological symptoms are the outcome of a disproportion between the person and her disturbing experiences —namely estrangement from oneself and alienation from one’s social environment. A person’s symptom is the outcome of her need for self-interpretation with respect to her encounter with puzzling experiences (Jasper 1913/1997). The person is engaged in trying to cope with and make sense of her puzzling (p. 958) experiences. Each patient, urged by the drive for the intelligible unity of her lifeconstruction, plays an active role in interacting with these expert Fences and thus in shaping her symptoms and the course and outcome of her illness. The person’s attitude is characterized by her attempt to achieve a self-interpretation of her disturbing and perplexing experiences, alongside a constant search for personal meaning. The production of a symptom is the extreme ra tio for alterity to become discernible. Psychopathological symptoms are the outcome of miscarried attempts to give a meaning to distressing experiences, to explain and cope with them. The encounter with alterity may offer the vantage from which a person can see herself from another, often radically new, perspective. Thus, oth erness kindles the progressive dialectics of personal identity. Narratives are the principal means to integrate alterity into autobiographical memory, providing temporal and goal structure, combining personal experiences into a coherent story related to the self.

The main difference between this person-centered understanding of mental disorders and an exclusively neurobiological model is that in the latter the patient is conceived as a pas Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy chive victim of her symptoms, whereas the former attributes to the patient an active role in shaping her symptoms, course, and outcome. Each patient, as a “goal-directed being,” plays an active role and stamps her autograph onto the raw material of her basic abhor mal experiences. When a clinical syndrome emerges, the line of the pathogenic trajectory is the following: a disproportion of alterity and the person’s resources for understand ing, of emotions and rationality, of pathos and logos, of otherness and selfhood bringing about a disturbing metamorphosis of selfand world-experience; a miscarried autohermeneutics or self-interpretation of one’s abnormal experiences and of the transform sons of the life-world that they bring about; the fixation in a psychopathological strum Cure in which the dialectics between the person and alterity gets lost.

This person-centered, dialectic approach helps us to see the patient as meaning-making entity rather than passive individual. The patient “can see himself, judge himself, and Could himself” ( Jasper 1913/1997: 424). His attempts at self-understanding are not nec essarily pathological and are potentially adaptive.

This approach contains a theoretical framework and practical resources for understand ing the diversity of psychopathological structures, including symptom presentation, course, and outcome as a consequence of the different ways patients seek to make sense of and value the basic changes in selfand world-experiences. It also contains a frame work for engaging with human fragility by means of a person-centered, dialectic therapy.

Phenomenological Psychotherapy as a Quest # for Meaning In endorsing the legacy of phenomenological psychopathology and its emphasis on the analysis of subjectivity by means of the first-person and second-person mode of under standing, phenomenologically oriented psychotherapy aims for a wide-range, fine-grained assessment of the patient’s morbid subjectivity, not constrained in a prior fixed schemata such as specific techniques or structured question-and-answer procedures (Stanghellini and Mancini (p. 959) 2017). The phenomenological attitude in psychotherapy can be con Sensed in one single question: What do we need to put ourselves at the side of the pa taint? The first step is quite obvious: we need to perform a radical epoché with respect to all approaches that see mental disorders as failures of normative functioning, avoid the language reflecting deviance-laden and vice-laden conceptualizations of the patient’s ex istential condition, and give the word to the patient himself in describing his perspective. In a formula: switch from negative to positive pathography (that is, a narrative of what is there, rather than on what is lacking, in the patient’s life-world). The second step, also suggested by van den Berg, is to switch from an introspective to an extraspective pathography. This means that if we want to know what-it-is-like to have a given expert Once we should not limit ourselves to explore the patient’s subjective sensations, but to focus on the world as it appears to him.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy This approach can provide the background for unfolding the phenomena of the patient’s existence from the angle of the life-world inhabited by him, including all those details that resist standard semiological classification; and it can rescue the architectural nexus that lends coherence and continuity to them. Phenomenological psychopathology assumes that the manifold of phenomena of a given mental disorder has a meaningful coherence. Rather than being a mere aggregate of symptoms, they form a structured totality, that is, a meaningful whole. Also, the method of phenomenological psychopathology is a prereq uisite for moving beyond pure static description of the life-world toward the illumination of the structures of subjectivity that allegedly generate and structure the phenomenal world.

In this section I describe the basic philosophical principles of the phenomenologically ori Anted framework for psychotherapeutic care. In this framework, psychotherapy can be defined as a quest for meaning based on the art of questioning. This includes five steps corresponding to five levels of meaningfulness.

Unfolding the Phenomena of the Life-World and Rescuing its Implicit Structure The first step of phenomenological psychotherapy is unfolding the details of the patient’s psychopathological world—its explication. Unfolding means to exposit, open up, or lay bare the pleats, creases, or corrugations of a text. The opposite of this is to garble, per vert, distort, or twist/ stretch/ strain the text itself. This operation can be seen as the nec Pessary first step of all forms of understanding, consisting in an enlightenment or clarifica son of existence— Existenzerhellung in Jasper’s terms.

The phenomenal world that comes into sight through the unfolding is seen as a text. The product of unfolding is a text that reflects the phenomenal world, the world as it appears to the subject of experience, including all those details that resist standard semiological classification. In a given psychopathological text, there is much more than that which can be mapped using the catalogue of psychopathological sump toms (like phobias, formal thought disorders, or delusions). What becomes perspicuous is the texture that is immanent in the text itself, although it may remain invisible to or Dunno iced by the author. Explication enriches understanding by providing further resources in addition to those that are immediately visible. The aim of this process is to rescue the lo gos of the phenomena in themselves, by “bringing unnoticed material into conscious Bess”—as Jasper (1913/ (p. 960) 1997: 307) would put it. The logos that is immanent in the intertwining of phenomena is called sense, that is, the internal coherence between the clinical (as well as subclinical and existential) phenomena found in a given condition of suffering. Phenomenological psychopathology advocates the idea that the phenomena embedded in a given (normal or abnormal) form of existence are a meaning ful whole. This has an important clinical implication. The standard understanding of the concept of “syndrome” is one which views it as a cluster of symptoms which happen to hang together not by any mutual phenomenological implication, but by their being other wise unrelated effects of a common neurobiological cause. This alternative perspective Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy holds that the manifold (abnormal) phenomena in a syndrome are meaningfully intercom nested, that is, they form a structure. A psychopathological syndrome is not simply a ca Dual association of (abnormal) phenomena. To have a phenomenological grasp on these phenomena is to grasp the structural nexus that lends coherence and continuity to them, because each phenomenon in a psychopathological structure carries traces of the under lying formal alterations of subjectivity.

Although this discourse is imbued with visual metaphors, it is important to note that this process of unfolding is profoundly rooted in hearing—or even better: listening and dia logging—and in the power of the spoken word. The kind of seeing implied in this practice should be—to adopt Devin’s terms—“multiple, aware of its context, inclusionary, horizontal and caring”. Hearing contributes to an ethics based on reciprocity and belonging, as well as to establishing a kind of knowledge focused on subjective exp riences and personal narratives.

Rescuing the Implicit Structures of the Self The second stratum made visible by this process consists of the invisible conditions of possibility of the world disclosed in the first level. By rescuing the map of the world that is depicted in the text, we can approximate the architecture of the Self that constituted it. This is an exploration of the implicit structures of experience, or into the structures of the Self as the tacit and pre-reflexive conditions for the emergence of mental contents. It looks for the way consciousness must be structured to make phenomena appear as they appear to the experiencing Self. Looking for structural relationships consists in the un folding of the basic structure(s) of subjectivity, that is, the way the Self appropriates phe novena.

The guidelines for reconstructing the life-world in which a person lives are the so-called existential, the basic categories, or categorical characteristics, of the fundamental fea Cures of human existence, namely, lived time, space, body, otherness, materiality, and so on (Heidegger 1927/1962). In this way we can trace back this transformation of the lifeworld to a specific configuration of the embodied Self as the origin of a given mode of in habiting the world, and perceiving, manipulating, and making sense of it. In order to grasp the transcendental framework of one’s experience, one must turn one’s gaze away from one’s “mind” (and also from the “world” as it appears in straightforward cognition) and look for the world’s spatiotemporal architecture which reflects it. The reconstruction of the patient’s life-world, and of the transcendental structures of his Self, allows for the patient’s behavior, expression, and experience to become understandable.

(p. 961) Narrating the Transcendental Origin of the Life-World This kind of practice connecting a given experience (abnormal or not) with its transcend dental condition of possibility may have pathogenetic implications, thus linking the re search on meanings to that on causes of mental symptoms. The path to genetic under standing in psychopathology was opened by Jasper, who described it as the “[i]Inner, sub Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy jective, direct grasp of psychic connectedness” ( Jasper 1913/1997: 307). Genetic under standing, according to Jasper, is a kind of knowledge that establishes meaningful con Sections between psychic phenomena. Jasper argued that psychic events emerge out of each other in a way that we can immediately understand. For instance, we immediately understand that attacked people become angry and spring to defense, or a cheated per son grows suspicious. The philosophical paragon inspiring Jasper is Nietzsche’s under standing of morality as connected to weakness: the awareness of one’s weakness, wretchedness, and suffering gives rise to moral demands and religion, because in this roundabout way the psyche can gratify its will to power. Jasper offers several examples of genetic understanding in psychopathology, among them psychic reactions and the de velopment of passions. Jasper insists on the character of immediateness and self-evi Fence in grasping meaningful connections in someone’s life. To him, genetic understand ing in psychopathology “is a precondition of the psychology of meaningful phenomena... just as the reality of perception and of causality is the precondition of the natural sci Fences” (1913/1997: 303).

Husserl also developed, beyond static or descriptive phenomenology, another kind of ge netic or constructive phenomenology that he called “explanatory”. This is a kind of developmental or diachronic understanding studying the way complex modes of experience are constituted via the synthesis of more basic modes of lived experiences. The key dispositive of Husserl’s explanatory phenomenology is motivational causality. It has been argued that “analyzing the basic constitution and explicating the implicit strum Cure of experience, phenomenology offers another way of developmental understanding: it allows for a comprehension of the pre-reflective dimension of experience... from which manifest symptoms arise” ( Paras and Sass 2008: 280). In this way, the dialogue moves beyond pure description and static understanding toward “an understanding of both the overall unity of that person’s subjectivity and its development over time” ( Paras and Sass 2008: 264). This kind of narrative, based on the understanding of the basic ar chitecture of the life-world, and on the structures of subjectivity which allegedly generate them, may allow us to both make sense of (rescue the personal meaning) and genetically understand (rescue the personal motivation of) a given symptom, be it an action or a be lief.

Appropriation (by the Clinician) of the Patient’s Life-World The fourth level of meaningfulness made manifest by this exploration is the world that the text opens up in the patient when it is appropriated by the clinician. The clinician approx pirates the sense of the patient’s experience and suggests his view of it. To appropriate a text means to acknowledge the way the text belongs to the reader, the way the reader could inhabit it. It is an attempt at reducing the distance between the text and its reader. If the interpretandum were completely extraneous, the understanding enterprise would be (p. 962) condemned to a checkmate, and if it were completely familiar, there would be no sense in making an effort at interpretation. The clinician makes explicit his under standing as his own, that is, the vantage point from which he sees the patient’s situation. This implies, in fact, a tension between extraneousness and familiarity. In this way, and Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy only in this way, the clinician may become a “You” for his patient. The clinician appropri Utes the patient’s world by means of his own imagination when he tries to reply to the question: “To make sense of the patient’s otherwise absurd and otherwise meaningless behavior, I must imagine myself as if I were living in a world that has the following char acteristics.” This approximation to the patient’s life-world is carried out by the clinician via as-if experiments that are metaphorically expressed.

Grasping the Importance of the Patient’s Life-World The meanings that we find in a text may exceed the intention of the author. This is the case with any kind of symptom. By unfolding the structures of a text, we can understand an author better than the author himself. Also, during this process of unfolding, the text lays in front of its author who can adopt a third-person stance over the text itself—and in the case of the symptom the patient can take a reflexive stance over the feel and the meaning of his experience, thus reinforcing his subjective and intersubjective sense of be ing a Self. The importance of a text reaches beyond this level of understanding and dis closes the mode of being-in-the-world of that individual patient as a universal problem. It reveals the way his existence belongs to human existence as a whole, to the condicio hu Dana. The text may display meanings that transcend the situation in which the text was produced. To grasp the importance of a text is to unfold “the revelatory power implicit in his discourse, beyond the limited horizon of his own existential situation” ( Ricoeur 1981: 191). The importance of a text is what “goes ‘beyond’ its relevance to the initial situ son” (Ricoeur 1981: 207). In virtue of its importance, a text acquires a universal (not merely contingent) meaning, and its author embodies a universal problem (he stops being a merely contingent sufferer).

The PHD Method: Phenomenology, Hermeneu # tics, and Psychodynamics In the previous section, I explained the basic philosophical principles of phenomenology cal psychotherapy as a quest for meaning. In this section, I will provide the practical guidelines for performing it according to these principles.

The phenomenological method is based on the art of dialogue. The aim of dialogue is to obtain a sharper view of a given phenomenon through an exchange of views between two or more partners. It is literally and inter-view. Emphasis ing the dialogical nature of phenomenology, Ricoeur takes distance from the idea that phenomenology is about the idiosyncratic discovery of the Lidos of a given phenom non. The kind of phenomenology at issue here—namely hermeneutic phenomenology—is not (p. 963) (or is not just) an eidetic practice, rather it is an activity that takes place in an intersubjective space and its product is the outcome of a process of dialogical confront son.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy It should not come as a surprise that phenomenology, as the bedrock of care, is a dialog cal practice. We, as human beings, are dialogue: of the person with herself, and with oth er persons. Mental disorder is the crisis of the dialogue of the person with the alterity that inhabits her, and with the alterity incarnated in the other persons. Human existence is a yearning for unity and identity. Yet, this attempt is unfulfilled in the encounter with alterity, that is, with all the powers of the involuntary. All this generates feelings of es trangement. Mental pathologies may be read as miscarried attempts to struggle for a sense of reconciliation, to heal the wounds of disunion. Care is an effort to reconstruct such a vulnerable dialogue of the soul with herself.

The practice of care that derives from these assumptions is based on the integration of three basic dispositives, synthesized in the acronym PHD—bringing together phenom nology, hermeneutics, and psychodynamics.

Phenomenological Unfolding As we have seen on the previous paragraph, the basic purpose of the unfolding is to em power clinician and patient with a systematic knowledge of the abnormal phenomena that affect the patient. “Unfolding” means to open up and lay bare the pleats of the patient’s experiences. What comes into sight is the texture that is immanent in the patient’s style of experience/action, although it may remain invisible to or unnoticed by him. Unfolding enriches understanding by providing further resources in addition to those that are mime diately visible. The main aim of unfolding is to rescue the logos of the phenomena in themselves, that is, immanent in the intertwining of phenomena.

An outstanding example of phenomenological unfolding is given by Minkowski. In a classic idiographic essay on the structure of depressive states, following an in-depth portrayal of the manifold abhor mal experiences and sensations of a twenty-six-year-old man with a diagnosis of “ambiva lent depression” (a subtype of major depression), mainly relying on this man’s self-de scriptions, Minkowski attempts to grasp the kernel underlying these symptoms. The pa taint reports his complaints and Minkowski carefully registers and systematically orders them. He documents cenesthopathic troubles (“I have the sensation of a stop of vegeta Dive functions”), sensations of materialization (“I am nothing but a kind of animal fun son”), disorders of self-awareness (“I don’t feel myself anymore. I don’t exist anymore”) and of intersubjectivity (“I resonate with people, I reflect their vibrations,” “I have the im precision to be rubbish thrown into life, so much I feel distant from the others”); he com plains about disorders of action (“I have always the sensation of incompleteness”), and of temporalization (“I have been persuaded to be a person sick of time ( malady du temps ),” “I have the sensation that time passes very fast, faster than for the others, too fast,” “I don’t have the sensation of continuity anymore,” “I have the obsession with the past”).

So far, Minkowski’s analysis is a scholarly example of phenomenal assessment: he records personal experiences, as idiosyncratic as they are, including those phenomena that are not categorized in ad hoc diagnostic checklists. To note, he is not simply interested in psy Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy chopathological symptoms in a traditional sense (indexes for diagnosis): he mentions nei her (p. 964) disorders of ideation (delusions or other “false ideas”) nor abnormal moods (sadness, anger, or anhedonia). Minkowski is concerned with reconstructing the patient’s life-world, “the lived experience of the real world that surrounds him”, more than counting his symptoms. To obtain this, he methodically brackets or sus pends all the “Video-Effective” (cognitive and Effective) contents of experience, and focuses on formal aspects or the spatiotemporal configurations that are implicit in the patient’s experiences. The main guidelines for this are lived space and time, but the way the pa taint experiences his own body, self, and other persons are also included in Minkowski’s inquiries. This patient’s experiences, examined from this angle, depart from those one may find in the common-sense world in which we all live. Following this path, to a certain extent it is possible to feel or imagine what it is like to live in the patient’s world. Howe er, at this stage of reconstruction the life-world still lacks a core that keeps its parts meaningfully interconnected—the “underlying unity characteristic of particular types of abnormal lived world”.

A psychopathological syndrome is the expression of a profound and characteristic modify cation of the human existence in its entirety. We need to grasp the intimate transform son of subjectivity underlying the manifold symptoms and conferring them their structure al unity. In Minkowsky’s own words, “the way in which personality is situated, in normal as well as in pathological terms, in relation to lived time and lived space”, the “organized living unity” of abnormal psychic phenomena—“a deeper symptom compared to surface symptoms on which contemporary nosography is based”.

The procedure here credited to Minkowski can serve as a model to grasp the Lidos that keeps the manifold of symptoms meaningfully interconnected. Indeed, all the symptoms presented by Minkowski’s patient can be seen as empirical variations of an essential property shared by all these symptoms. In the case study illustrated by Minkowski, it is the patient himself that finds the right words to talk about the Lidos of his sufferings: “ I am person sick of time. ” This seems to be the fundamental essential phenomenon that is always implicit and virtually present in all the manifest parts of his life-world (e.g. the sensation of a cessation of vegetative functions, the impression of being rubbish thrown into life, the sensation of incompleteness, the feeling that time passes very fast, the im precision to lack temporal continuity and the obsession with the past).

The essential phenomenon is a disorder of the experience of time that gives the manifold abnormal phenomena affecting this patient its meaningful coherence. Minkowski writes that at the roots of our awareness of time there are two elements, distinct but intimately related: one dynamic in nature, preparing our “ élan ” toward the future, the other, more static, that can be called “the eternal” ( l’éternel ). Our normal expert Once of time results from its harmonious synthesis, so that time is neither experienced as a fugue nor as fixation. In pathological conditions, this synthesis falls apart. In major de pressions, l’ élan is overpowered by l ’éternel. The core symptom is a disorder of Donation or inhibition of becoming. This disorder of lived time transpires in all phenomena charac terizing major depression, including the experience of a stagnation of endogenous vital Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy processes, the experience of present and future dominated by the past, and the expert Once of the slackening of the flow of time. All are supposedly the phenomenal manifestations of the pre-phenomenal disturbance of temporality called Donation, that is, the basic energetic momentum ( élan ) of mental life that gives the sense of being alive and acting spontaneously, and which orientates one’s life in the direction of the future. The disturbance of Donation (time-sickness, maladies du temps ) is the structure al nexus that gives them unity and (p. 965) coherence; it allows for making sense of ac sons, thoughts, emotions, and experiences that would otherwise be inexplicable.

The unfolding thus helps to recover the implicit (not necessarily rejected), automatic (not censored), forgotten (not forbidden) sources that make phenomena appear as they ap pear to the patient, his drives, emotions, and habits—the three emblematic components of the obscure and dissociated spontaneity that make up the involuntary dimension in hu man existence.

Hermeneutic Analysis The second moment of the PHD method is the analysis of the person’s position-taking to ward her experiences. This is called the hermeneutic moment (H) since it is focused on the way the patient interprets or makes sense of his own experiences. The central idea is that there is an active interplay between the person and her basic abnormal experiences. As self-interpreting animals, we continuously strive to make sense of what happens to us, or to make a logos out of pathos. The H mo Bent of the PHD pays attention to the active role that the person has in taking a position and interacting with her abnormal and distressing experiences. The patient, with her unique strengths and resources as well as needs and difficulties, has an active role in shaping her symptoms, and the course and outcome of her disorder.

As the P moment unfolds the patient’s life-world or world-experience, the H moment re Deals the patients worldview. This concept refers to the person’s philosophy of life, that is, the structure of values that orients her way to experience reality and her actions. Jasper explains that a worldview consists of two parts: an “attitude,” the pattern of mental existence by means of which the world is experienced, and a “world-pic Cure,” the whole of the mental content a person possess. Husserl further explains that a “world-view is thus essentially an individual accomplishment, a sort of personal religious faith; but it is distinguished from traditional faith, that of revealed religion, through the fact that it makes no claim to an unconditioned truth binding for all men” ( Husserl 1936/1970: 389). A worldview is thus a mental framework or a shelter (Gehause ) in which a person has her hold and seeks refuge from her dread of limit situations, those situations in which her existence can be put at jeopardy.

Persons vulnerable to schizophrenia, for instance, may show an attitude of distrust to ward conventional knowledge and attunement. Eccen Eric values in persons with schizophrenia are one aspect of an overall crisis of common sense and of these persons’ difficulties in feeling attuned to the others and making sense Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy of their behavior. The outcome of this has been designated as antagonomia (literally: striving against rules) and idionomia (the sentiment of the radical uniqueness and excel tonality of one’s own internal law ( Homos ) with respect to common sense or the other hu man beings). These quasi-philosophies are shelters or defensive housings. In general, we enter into one of these shelters when commonsensical assumptions are jeopardized. When I enter into one of these protective casings, it becomes a structured and structuring organization for me. My worldview pro Sects me from the moral pain produced by disturbing experiences, but endlessly produces other experiences of a similar kind.

(p. 966) It is extremely difficult to become aware of the shelter in which I live, of its pre curiousness, and of the way it structures my life-world and the relationships with other persons. My shelter is a disposition that generates practices, beliefs, perceptions, feel Dings, and so forth. Rescuing from the implicit the active role that values have in holding together a patient’s shelter and in shaping his abnormal and distressing experiences is the via regia to help him to recalibrate his dysfunctional, miscarried position-taking and, finally, to recover his sense of responsibility and agency.

An example of phenomenologically informed therapeutic values-based interviews may come from the case of anorexia (Fulford and Stanghellini, chapter 41 ). The psychopath logical core of the life-world of persons with anorexia nervosa is not feeling oneself in the first-person perspective, and in particular feeling extraneous from one’s body and emo sons. This entails a fleeting feel of selfhood and an evanescent sense of identity (Stanghellini and Mancini in press). This vulnerable awareness of one self is disturbing and generates the need to appraise oneself in alternative ways. One of the coping strategies or alternative means of self-recognition in these persons is feeling their body through the gaze of the others. The other has a key role in the life-world of persons with anorexia since it is through being looked at by others that these persons can achieve a feeling of their own body and a sense of identity. Obviously, this coping strategy is not voluntarily adopted and remains largely unconscious. A second way to regain a sense of themselves is identifying oneself through one’s passion for thinness as passions represent a rupture in the fleeting character of their emotional and bodily life. The ossify cation of this passion and of the related value is the expression of the need to compensate the disturbing, shameful, and anxiogenic fleeting sense of selfhood and identity.

The unfolding (P) of the life-world of persons with anorexia and the analysis of their val ue-structure and position-taking (H) is essential if we want to acknowledge that it’s a mis take to see these persons’ values as merely imperfect cognition or as a kind of irrational or delusional belief about one’s body or nutrition. Rather, their values are a kind of Deli ion that goes beyond the rationality/irrationality divide. It is about the worth of life and the way to make one’s life meaningful. Food for them has a moral value: it is a sin and a temptation. Fatness and thinness—that is, one’s bodily shape—have a moral value too. Fatness has a moral value as indicative of laziness, lack of self-care, and self-control. Thinness means the capacity to give a shape to oneself and is more valuable than any Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy thing else including health and life itself. Strict rules are needed not to do wrong and to be led astray. Starvation is the unique salvation practice.

Dynamic Analysis The psychodynamic moment (D) of the PHD consists in tracing back the life-world (one’s experiences and actions) and the worldview (one’s values and position-taking) to the lifehistory in which they are embedded. To make sense of a given phenomenon is finally to posit it in a meaningful context, and this context includes the personal history of the pa taint.

With Binswanger (1928/1963 ) we call “personal life-history” the intimate interconnection of the contents of the person’s experiences. Through histories (or narratives) we are able to articulate the reasons of our character and the meanings of the events that we en counter in our life. Narratives are patterns of meanings that contribute to make sense of my character (p. 967) and the via regia to work through the meaning of a given situation in my life. They moderate the ossification of the character and the traumatic potential of the event. They make our involuntary dispositions and the alterity contained in the event a dynamic part of our personal history. The psychodynamic analysis consists, first of all, in the analysis of the pathogenic situation, that is, of the life situation that kindles the xis tential crisis and the psychopathological decomposition. Contrary to the standard notion of “trauma” which sees the person passively undergoing a distressing event, the notion of “situation” shows both the active (the person actively concurs in creating the situation) and the passive roles (the persons does not consciously intends to create the situation) (Tellenbach 1961/1980). The pathogenic situation can be seen as a limit situation in which the vulnerable structure of the patient is made manifest. Limit situations may turn into a pathogenic situation when they impact a given existentially vulnerable person. Limit situations include vulnerability to guilt, inescapability of finitude, anxiety for freedom, fragility of one’s body, loneliness of one’s existence, etc.

The relation between pathogenic situations and existentially vulnerable personality is a key-lock relation in the sense that each personality has its own specif ic limit situation. Fuchs offers some examples of such vulnerability: the hypochondriac’s sensitivity to the perils of bodily existence, the anorexic’s sensitivity to the dependency on a material body, the depressive’s vulnerability in relation to freedom and guilt, and the narcissist’s vulnerability to the limitation of possibilities.

Existentially vulnerable persons establish themselves within the defensive walls of a Nous ing to avoid the contents uncovered by their specific limit situation. For in stance, for obsessive structures, completeness and perfection are the basic assumption/ housing that defends from contingency and unpredictability. For the melancholic type of personality (Tellenbach 1961/1980 ) orderliness and hypernomia defend from guilt feel Dings. For dependent personality, hanging on others is the way to avoid the anxiety of free dom. For narcissistic personality, continuously expanding one’s status via success is a de Dense from finiteness, restriction, and imperfection.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy The D moment of the PHD helps the patient to recognize her own limit situation and its implications, to accept it and to take a stance toward it. Limit situations thus uncover the basic conditions of existence, that is, its being at risk of failure, guilt, death, financial ru in, etc. Personality structures are housings or shelters meant to defend from these threats. Yet these housings are precarious, vulnerable. The analysis of the pathogenic sit Cation thus leads to the analysis of the patient’s vulnerable structure. This indicates a sig nificant combination of stable characteristics that make up the ontological constitution around which the vulnerability of the person is organized. A person’s vulnerable strum Cure is the amalgamation of a certain set of values and beliefs that serve as a protection from this person’s limit situation. For instance, antagonomia in persons with schizophre nia, that is, their claiming one’s independence as the most important value, can be seen as a shelter or defensive structure against their feeling to be vulnerable to the influx com ing from the external world since for them conventional (common sense) assumptions, so Dial-shared knowledge, common ways of thinking and behaving, and immediate (empathy ic) relationships and emotional attunement are evaluated as dangerous sources of loss of individuation. The D moment of the PHD can lead a patient to understand one’s own she ter, its basic assumptions or philosophy of life, as a fragile defense against one’s own limit situation, and to the awareness of the failure of all attempts toward solution through housings.

(p. 968) The analyses of the pathogenic situation and of the vulnerable structure are part and parcel of psychodynamics as the basic presuppositions of psychodynamics are psy chological (existential) continuity and psychological determinism. The for mer assumes that all events in a person’s life (including those that look inconsistent) are lawful and potentially meaningful in a particular way for that person. The latter presumes that all events in a person’s life have at least as one of their causes a psychological cause and can thereby be explained on a psychological basis. The PHD method endorses the first one, and only partially the second. The purpose of the D moment in the PHD method is not an archaeology, that is, the rescuing of a remote cause that is posited in the past. The psychodynamic moment is not the search for a big bang. What is searched for is not a datum, an event that has taken place at the origin of a person’s story. Rather, it is a phenomenon that allows the intelligibility of the other historical phe novena. It is something that belongs to a person’s life-history that helps make intelligible a string of phenomena whose association might have passed unobserved. This “some thing” enforces the coherence and synchronic comprehensibility of the system ( Agamben 2008: 93). Looking into a person’s past has not the purpose of finding a remote traumatic event that causally explains (to explain technically means sire per causes ) the following events that have taken place. Rather, the purpose is looking for the phenomenon—let’s call it the Urphäomen— that can lend coherence to the person’s life-history. (p. 968) The analyses of the pathogenic situation and of the vulnerable structure are part and parcel of psychodynamics as the basic presuppositions of psychodynamics are psy chological (existential) continuity and psychological determinism. The for mer assumes that all events in a person’s life (including those that look inconsistent) are lawful and potentially meaningful in a particular way for that person. The latter presumes that all events in a person’s life have at least as one of their causes a psychological cause and can thereby be explained on a psychological basis. The PHD method endorses the first one, and only partially the second. The purpose of the D moment in the PHD method is not an archaeology, that is, the rescuing of a remote cause that is posited in the past. The psychodynamic moment is not the search for a big bang. What is searched for is not a datum, an event that has taken place at the origin of a person’s story. Rather, it is a phenomenon that allows the intelligibility of the other historical phe novena. It is something that belongs to a person’s life-history that helps make intelligible a string of phenomena whose association might have passed unobserved. This “some thing” enforces the coherence and synchronic comprehensibility of the system ( Agamben 2008: 93). Looking into a person’s past has not the purpose of finding a remote traumatic event that causally explains (to explain technically means sire per causes ) the following events that have taken place. Rather, the purpose is looking for the phenomenon—let’s call it the Urphäomen— that can lend coherence to the person’s life-history.

The Urphäomen is not chronologically original, but hermeneutically so. It may not be a traumatic event that has taken place in the remote past and gave origin to a given per Tonal development. The Urphäomen is better understood as the best exemplar of a class of phenomena that exhibits, shows, and points out the essential properties of that kind of phenomena. It is a single phenomenon in a person’s life-history that, being very perspicu Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychotherapy ous in its singularity, can make intelligible an entire group of phenomena, whose sedan tic homogeneousness it has contributed to creating. If I discover the Urphäomen in a person’s life-history, this will shed light on all other previously opaque phenomena by means of the analogy between itself and the other phenomena. The Urphäomen can transform a set of phenomena that, at face value, were unrelated into a gestalt of mean ingfully related phenomena. It is not an aetio-pathogenic construct, but rather a hermeneutic one. It can generate pathogenic or etiological hypotheses, but it should not be taken as an aetio-pathogenic construct per se. The task of reconstructing the “causes” of human behavior in all cases is based on and must therefore be preceded by—especially in a therapeutic context—that of reconstructing its meaning that motivates behavior. Thus, this task is first and foremost hermeneutical in nature.

Conclusion: A Decalogue for Phenomenological # Psychotherapy 1) Suspending all common-sense as well as theoretical prejudices and focusing on the patient’s subjective experience as they are narrated by him as the point of dear Cure of any clinical encounter.

(p. 969) 2) Encouraging the patient to unfold his experiences and make explicit his emotions and values as the core of his life-world and his personal horizon of mean ing.

3) Helping the patient to reflect upon his experiences, express them in a narrative format, and identify a core meaning, or meaning-organizer, around which his narra Dive can become meaningful for him.

4) Supporting the patient in taking a position in front of the way he narrates and makes sense of his experiences.

5) The clinician’s making explicit to the patient his own experiences elicited by the patient’s narratives, and his own understanding of the patient’s narrative (assume sons, personal experiences, beliefs) as if it were his own.

6) Through this process, the clinician also makes his own set of theoretical assume sons, personal experiences, values, and beliefs, explicit.

7) The clinician promotes a reciprocal exchange of perspectives with his patient.

8) Clinician and patient cooperate in the co-construction of a new meaningful narra Dive that includes and, if possible, integrates contributions from both the original per spectives.

9) The clinician tolerates diversity and potential conflicts of values and beliefs.

10) Finally, the clinician facilitates coexistence when it is not possible to establish consensus. PAGE_BREAK (p. 971) Stanghellini G. (2016b). “Phenomenological Psychopathology and Care. From Per son-Centered Dialectical Psychopathology to the PHD Method for Psychotherapy.” In G. Stanghellini and M. Aragon (eating disorders.), An Experiential Approach to Psychopathology. What is it Like to Suffer from Mental Disorders. Heidelberg/New York: Stringer.

Stanghellini G. and Ballerina M.. “Values in Persons with Schizophrenia.” Schizo phrenia Bulletin 33: 131–141.

Stanghellini G., Castellini G., Brogan P., Faravelli C., Wicca fifth.. “Identity and Eating Disorders (IDEA): A Questionnaire Evaluating Identity and Embodiment in Eating Visor der Patients.” Psychopathology 45: 147–158.

Stanghellini G., Bolton D., and Fulford K. W. M.. “Person-centered Psychopatholo gy of Schizophrenia: Building on Karl Jasper’ Understanding of Patient’s Attitude toward his Illness.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 39: 287–294.

Stanghellini G. and Ross R.. “Phenol-phenotype: A Holistic Approach to the Psy chopathology of Schizophrenia.” Current Opinion Psychiatry 27: 236–241.

Stanghellini G. and Aragon M.. “Phenomenological Psychopathology: Toward a Person-Centered Hermeneutic Approach in the Clinical Encounter.” In G. Stanghellini and M. Aragon (eating disorders.), An Experiential Approach to Psychopathology. What is it Like to Suffer from Mental Disorders, pp. 1–43. Heidelberg/New York: Stringer.

Stanghellini G., Ballerina M., Presenza S., Mancini M., Northoff G., and Cutting J.. “Abnormal Time Experiences in Major Depression: An Empirical Qualitative Study.” Psy chopathology. doi: 10.1159/000452892 Stanghellini G. and Mancini M.. The Therapeutic Interview. Emotions, Values and the Life-world. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Tellenbach H. (1961/1980). Melancholy: History of the Problem, Endogeneity, Typology, Pathogenesis, Clinical Considerations. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

Urfer A.. “Phenomenology and Psychopathology of Schizophrenia: The Views of Eugène Minkowski.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 8: 279–289.

van den Berg J. H.. The Phenomenological Approach to Psychiatry. An Introduction to Recent Phenomenological Psychopathology. Springfield: Thomas Publisher.

Villarreal E. and Aragon M.. “El concerto de ‘comprensiòn’ (Verstehen) en Karl Jasper.” Vertex 116: 262–265.

Giovanni Stanghellini Department of Psychological, Humanistic and Territorial Sciences, Universityà G.

d’Annunzio’

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics René Rosfort The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jul 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Phenomenological psychopathology and psychiatric ethics are intimately related. The ar gument of this chapter is that phenomenological psychopathology makes it evident that ethical considerations are not merely an external normative perspective on psychiatry, but fundamental to the experience of mental illness, and as such critical to the medical understanding of what a mental illness is. Norms and values orient human existence, and our endeavor to make sense of and cure the mental suffering of a person involves a clari fixation of what the person cares about. A phenomenological approach can help us under stand that a sense of autonomy is constitutive of human self-awareness, and the demand of responsibility central to human identity. In fact, the dialectics of autonomy and respond sibility discloses the fragile character of human identity, and examining this fragility will allow us to see that a person’s mental suffering cannot be understood in isolation from her ideas about the good life.

Keywords: autonomy, responsibility, fragility, ethics, norm, value, care, the good life, cure # Introduction ETHICS is a fundamental part of psychiatry, and also a constant challenge to psychiatry. As with other branches of medicine, care for vulnerable individuals is at the heart of psy chiatry. Ethical principles and guidelines are established to secure recognition of the pa taint as a person. Since the humanitarian reforms of medical practice at the turn of the nineteenth century, the recognition that patients are persons has become an integrated part of medicine to the extent that is considered a fact on a par with our physiological and anatomical facts. Biological facts exist independently of human recognition, even though their existence is uncovered and corroborated by human beings. The fact that pa taints are persons is a different kind of fact. It is a normative fact. This means that it is a fact that cannot be discovered or ratified once and for all, but a fact that needs constant human recognition in order to exist. It is possible to understand and treat a patient as an Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics impersonal human being in need of medical assistance. The patient is thus reduced to an object of our scientific curiosity or to a means to fulfill our professional ambition. Recon Sizing the patient as a person is to see, understand, and interact with the patient as an autonomous person with a particular history and with her own experience of and ideas about her life. While the cure of disease is the avowed goal of medicine, an ethical per spective is meant to make health professionals acknowledge—or remember—that all dis eases are personal. A disease happens to a person who suffers in her or his own way. To put it concisely, one could argue that biomedical ethics is about securing care as a fund mental part of the medical cure. Care and the recognition of the patient as a person have become integral parts of contemporary medical practice, but how exactly to take care of the concrete person’s suffering is still a challenge that health professionals are faced with daily. The complexity of health care stems from the fact that patients have their individual needs and ideas about themselves and their illness. Safeguarding the autonomy of the person is a principal ethical concern in caring for the (p. 973) patient, but the work to cure the patient also requires adopting an impersonal perspective on the suffering of the per son. A medical approach has to adopt a stance capable of diagnosing and treating the im personal and heteronomous factors at work in a person’s illness, even when this course of treatment may go against the patient’s understanding of her suffering. In no branch of medicine is this interplay of care and cure as intimately interwoven into the fabric of both theory and practice as is the case with psychiatry.

Psychiatric ethics is part of biomedical ethics, and as such it is concerned with mapping out and examining the ethical foundation, principles, theories, and methods concerning medical practice. Recent years have witnessed increase ing attention to the distinctiveness of the ethical issues involved in psychiatry, and it has been argued that psychiatric practice involves many features (e.g. patient vulnerabilities, stigma, societal structures, controversy over the concept of mental disorder, consumer movements) that combine to make it a unique biomedical practice with ethical challenges that require different perspectives than can be provided with a traditional bioethical approach. Common to both bioethical approaches and the more recent approaches of psychiatric ethics is to treat ethical perspectives as relevant almost excl Lively to the practice of psychiatry. In most approaches to mental illness, for example, bio logical and phenomenological approaches, ethics does not play an explanatory role in the theoretical work toward understanding a specific mental illness. The etiology and patio genesis of a mental illness are considered to be unaffected by ethical questions, and norms and values come into the account either before the scientific investigations begin or after they have been concluded. Most psychiatrists would probably agree that the pri Cary challenge for psychiatry is to connect anonymous biological explanations such as genetic and neurobiological functioning with the first-person experience of suffering. As Kenneth Kendler puts it: “We deal with symptoms of the mind. Stopping at third-person ‘explanations’ of disease mechanisms leaves our project unfinished. We also want, and our patients deserve, understanding in a first-person framework” ( Kendler 2014: 936). One of the most long-standing debates in psychiatry concerns which of the two levels is impersonal human being in need of medical assistance. The patient is thus reduced to an object of our scientific curiosity or to a means to fulfill our professional ambition. Recon Sizing the patient as a person is to see, understand, and interact with the patient as an autonomous person with a particular history and with her own experience of and ideas about her life. While the cure of disease is the avowed goal of medicine, an ethical per spective is meant to make health professionals acknowledge—or remember—that all dis eases are personal. A disease happens to a person who suffers in her or his own way. To put it concisely, one could argue that biomedical ethics is about securing care as a fund mental part of the medical cure. Care and the recognition of the patient as a person have become integral parts of contemporary medical practice, but how exactly to take care of the concrete person’s suffering is still a challenge that health professionals are faced with daily. The complexity of health care stems from the fact that patients have their individual needs and ideas about themselves and their illness. Safeguarding the autonomy of the person is a principal ethical concern in caring for the (p. 973) patient, but the work to cure the patient also requires adopting an impersonal perspective on the suffering of the per son. A medical approach has to adopt a stance capable of diagnosing and treating the im personal and heteronomous factors at work in a person’s illness, even when this course of treatment may go against the patient’s understanding of her suffering. In no branch of medicine is this interplay of care and cure as intimately interwoven into the fabric of both theory and practice as is the case with psychiatry.

Psychiatric ethics is part of biomedical ethics, and as such it is concerned with mapping out and examining the ethical foundation, principles, theories, and methods concerning medical practice. Recent years have witnessed increase ing attention to the distinctiveness of the ethical issues involved in psychiatry, and it has been argued that psychiatric practice involves many features (e.g. patient vulnerabilities, stigma, societal structures, controversy over the concept of mental disorder, consumer movements) that combine to make it a unique biomedical practice with ethical challenges that require different perspectives than can be provided with a traditional bioethical approach. Common to both bioethical approaches and the more recent approaches of psychiatric ethics is to treat ethical perspectives as relevant almost excl Lively to the practice of psychiatry. In most approaches to mental illness, for example, bio logical and phenomenological approaches, ethics does not play an explanatory role in the theoretical work toward understanding a specific mental illness. The etiology and patio genesis of a mental illness are considered to be unaffected by ethical questions, and norms and values come into the account either before the scientific investigations begin or after they have been concluded. Most psychiatrists would probably agree that the pri Cary challenge for psychiatry is to connect anonymous biological explanations such as genetic and neurobiological functioning with the first-person experience of suffering. As Kenneth Kendler puts it: “We deal with symptoms of the mind. Stopping at third-person ‘explanations’ of disease mechanisms leaves our project unfinished. We also want, and our patients deserve, understanding in a first-person framework” ( Kendler 2014: 936). One of the most long-standing debates in psychiatry concerns which of the two levels is Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics the primary object of psychiatric research. Biologically oriented psychiatrists argue that the mental illnesses are to be assessed and explained primarily on a third-person, imper Tonal biological level. Phenomenologically oriented psychic Wrists contend that mental illness is rooted in and developed through human experience, and that we therefore cannot explain any mental illness without taking into account the subjective aspects of that illness. Common to both ap roaches, though, is the exclusion of ethics from the theoretical framework. In neither ap roach do ethical considerations figure as explanatory elements in the examination of mental illness. On these accounts, ethical issues such as the distinction between biology cal and experiential norms, between personal values and cultural norms, the sense of obligation, the demand of responsibility, the ideal of a good life, the question of justice, the challenge of identity concern psychiatry practice rather than psychiatric theory. Ethics in this way functions as a kind of “add-on” to the discipline of psychiatry, that is, as a normative perspective introduced from outside the discipline in order to secure patient rights or in other ways regulate the practice of psychiatry.

Ethics has never figured prominently in phenomenological psychopathology, so in this re Aspect phenomenological psychopathology does not differ much from other psychiatric ap roaches. And yet, ethical considerations play a more critical role in phenomenological (p. 974) psychopathology than in most other approaches to mental illness. For the phe nomenological psychiatrist mental illness not only involves disturbances of experience as the result of biological malfunctioning or environmental stressors. Mental illness is an ill Bess of experience, and we cannot hope to understand or treat a mental illness without examining the experiential disturbances involved in that illness. These disturbances af Sect our sense of identity, our self-awareness, and the way we experience time, world, and other people. The central role that experience, self-awareness, and sense of identity play in phenomenological psychopathology means that ethical considerations cannot but be an integral part of the understanding of mental illness. Human experience is value-laden, self-awareness is saturated with feelings, and our sense of identity is constituted by norms, conventions, and concerns. We are not able make sense of and deal with mental suffering without an examination of how norms and values inform and orient human xis Fence. And perhaps even more importantly, understanding how to cure the mental suffer ing of a person involves a clarification of what the person cares about.

Ethics has never figured prominently in phenomenological psychopathology, so in this re Aspect phenomenological psychopathology does not differ much from other psychiatric ap roaches. And yet, ethical considerations play a more critical role in phenomenological (p. 974) psychopathology than in most other approaches to mental illness. For the phe nomenological psychiatrist mental illness not only involves disturbances of experience as the result of biological malfunctioning or environmental stressors. Mental illness is an ill Bess of experience, and we cannot hope to understand or treat a mental illness without examining the experiential disturbances involved in that illness. These disturbances af Sect our sense of identity, our self-awareness, and the way we experience time, world, and other people. The central role that experience, self-awareness, and sense of identity play in phenomenological psychopathology means that ethical considerations cannot but be an integral part of the understanding of mental illness. Human experience is value-laden, self-awareness is saturated with feelings, and our sense of identity is constituted by norms, conventions, and concerns. We are not able make sense of and deal with mental suffering without an examination of how norms and values inform and orient human xis Fence. And perhaps even more importantly, understanding how to cure the mental suffer ing of a person involves a clarification of what the person cares about.

The argument of this chapter is that the interplay of cure and care is central to phenom nological psychopathology, and that it is in the articulation of this interplay that we find the most significant contribution of phenomenological psychopathology to psychiatric ethics. In what follows, I will outline the relationship between ethics and phenomenology cal psychopathology by examining the perennial question of the good life, how to make sense of what we care about, the challenge of autonomy, and the problem of responsibili ty in relation to mental illness. I will use various philosophers to construct my argument, and primarily the works of two French phenomenologists from the twentieth century, Em Manuel Levinas and Paul Ricoeur. The work of these philosophers is concerned with showing that ethics is an integral part of human experience, and that we cannot under stand what it means to be human without articulating the ethical core of what we care Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics about. For Levinas and Ricoeur, phenomenological articulations of what we care about will bring out the personal character of ethical considerations. Ethics lurks in the simple question “what shall I do?” and, as the philosopher Volcker Gerhardt argues: When one suddenly asks this question by oneself, then one has a consciousness of morality. Then responsibility lets itself know. Conscience is stirred and demands that one understands one’s own duty.

(Gerhardt 1999: 389; author’s translation)

The phenomenological articulation of ethics as an integral part of human experience will support my argument that phenomenological psychopathology has a significant contribu son to make to psychiatric ethics. The phenomenological approach to psychopathology enables us to see that ethical considerations are not merely an external normative per spective on psychiatry, but constitutive of the experience of mental illness and as such critical to the medical understanding of what a mental illness is.

Ethics and the Ambiguity of the Good Life The good life has been a central topic in ethics since antiquity. In the Republic, Plato has Socrates discuss with the sophist Thrasymachus whether being just and honest con tributes (p. 975) to a person’s happiness or whether these virtues are merely foils cover ing more cynical power structures (Plato 1997: 981–998 [336b–354c]), and Aristotle opens the first systematic treatise on ethics, the Nicomachean Ethics, with the argument that every person wants to be happy, and that we all orient our lives around the idea of happiness (Aristotle 1984: 1729–1742 [1094a–1103a]). The problem is that the notions of the good life and happiness—as well as most other normative notions—are inherently vague and cause more confusion than clarity. Plato and Aristotle were of course aware of this, and the importance of their work, as is the case with subsequent moral philosophers, lies in the way they clarify and produce arguments for the norms and values that consti Cute our understanding of how to live a human life. Ethical examinations deal primarily with understanding our emotions, desires, and ideas in light of normative notions such as happiness and the good life. How to educate human beings so that they live peacefully and productively together in a society? How does a person become virtuous? How does a person learn to domesticate her desires and cravings in order to find a more permanent kind of happiness? In short, how can human beings live a good life?

The question of the good life dominated moral philosophy and ethical debates for milled nia, but in the Enlightenment the philosophical priority of the good life was challenged by the idea of duty. Toward the end of the seventeenth century, the German philosopher Im Manuel Kant revolutionized the philosophical debate about ethics and changed the culture al understanding of what it means to be a person. Inspired by the time-hallowed Christian tradition of neighborly love and contemporary Enlightenment ideas about autonomy and equality, Kant argued that the problem with orienting ethical considerations around the ideas of happiness and the good life is that human beings are inescapably selfish Area Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics Cures who most of the time use their rational capacities to justify their own selfish inter sets. He writes: “[W]e like to flatter ourselves by falsely attributing to ourselves a nobler motive, whereas in fact we can never, even by the most strenuous self-examination, get entirely behind our covert incentives, since when moral worth is at issue, what counts are not actions, which one sees, but those inner principles of actions that one does not see” ( Kant 1996a: 61–62). Our examinations of the good life and our understanding of virtue, character, and happiness cannot, on Kant’s account, extricate themselves from our individual perspective, our ideas, our culture, our desires and inclinations, that is, our subjectivity. The idea of the good life is teleological and as such aimed at ideals of good Bess and happiness. These ideals, however, cannot but be affected by the subjective val ues of the person or the intersubjective norms of the culture that constructs the ideals. The only way to escape the subjective particularity of our norms and values is to seek for a moral compass that leads to an understanding of goodness independent of our own in terests and desires. Kant finds this compass to be an impersonal moral law capable of universalizing our particular human perspectives and thereby working toward securing equality, autonomy, and dignity for all human beings. In fact, Kant’s radical argument is that we can only secure a life as autonomous human beings in and through our duty to re Aspect the humanity that we share with other human beings. This humanity is secured by the moral law and consists in our rational capacity to liberate ourselves from our incline sons and desires. Only through this detachment from our natural inclination do we be come free to choose our own life. To be human is thus to be an autonomous person, and to understand a human being as a person is to recognize a basic “freedom and indepen Fence from the mechanism of the whole nature” and to respect this freedom by never us ing a person “merely as a means,” but only as “an end in itself” ( Kant 1996b: 210).

(p. 976) The moral law with its impersonal imperatives of universality and humanity is therefore—paradoxically—that which secures our personal autonomy ( Manganaro 1989: 41–65). One of Kant’s most influential contributions to ethics is to be found in his argue Bent for our duty to respect the humanity that makes every human being an autonomous person. Our individual human freedom is only possible through a respect for and a con scant working for the freedom of the other person. (p. 976) The moral law with its impersonal imperatives of universality and humanity is therefore—paradoxically—that which secures our personal autonomy ( Manganaro 1989: 41–65). One of Kant’s most influential contributions to ethics is to be found in his argue Bent for our duty to respect the humanity that makes every human being an autonomous person. Our individual human freedom is only possible through a respect for and a con scant working for the freedom of the other person.

The good life and the respect for humanity are key topics in contemporary philosophical ethics, and both play a critical, although often tacit, role in mental health care. It is evi dent that mental health and the good life are entangled, that is, mental health is vital to a good life, and a good life is fundamental to our mental health. It is, however, not obvious how exactly mental health and the good life are related. There are of course many ways to approach this issue. Phenomenology offers an explanatory framework that allows us to examine how a person’s ideas about the good life can both promote and disturb that person’s mental health. This ambiguity of our ideas about a good life is connected with the norms and values that orient our existence. We experience our life through our ideas about how our life should be. Most of the time we do not explicitly articulate these ideas, but they still function as implicit points of orientation for our feelings, thoughts, and ac sons. The good life functions as a kind of horizon for our life, and we cannot, as Aristotle rightly points out, escape the desire for the good life. Ideas about a good life are in this Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics sense constitutive of our experience of the world, other people, and ourselves. This also means that these ideas have significant impact on our mental health. Our hope for the good life can help us through disturbances of our mental health and alleviate our mental suffering. On the other hand, our inability to realize our ideas of a good life can make us despair and thus contribute to the disturbances of our mental health and intensify our metal suffering. Richard Bentall cogently captures this vital role of hope in mental health care: “Sometimes ordinary stories of triumph over adversity are inspiring. They remind us that hope is the fire that will guide us through darkness. Psychiatry’s greatest sin has been to crush hope in those it has claimed to care for. Without hope the struggle for sur Rival seems pointless. With hope, almost everything seems possible” ( Bentall 2009: 288).

This ambiguity of the good life is closely connected with the duty to humanity. As we have seen, Kant introduced the duty to humanity in order to demonstrate the problematic char cater of our ideas of the good life. The duty to humanity concerns our recognition of hu man beings as autonomous persons. We have, according to Kant, a duty to recognize and respect our own autonomy and the autonomy of other people. These two basic aspects of autonomy—my autonomy as well as that of the other—present a constant challenge to our ideas about the good life. First of all, our ideas about the good life are never entirely our own, but significantly influenced by our upbringing, sociocultural, and biological factors, and as such the good life can be experienced as something that is imposed on us, and at times as an obstacle to our autonomy, to our sense of being an individual and unique self. Moreover, our ideas about what is good and meaningful change over time, and we might find ourselves alienated from the life that we have chosen to live. Our choices are, in oth er words, never truly transparent to ourselves, and who we want to be is often in tension with who we have become and what we actually do. Finally, ideas of the good life are in herently selfish and therefore risk making us blind to the fact that our life is lived through the coexistence with other people. Our ideas about the good life are in constant tension, if not outright conflict, (p. 977) with our duty to recognize and treat other human beings as autonomous persons who can never be used to further our own interests.

To be human is to be an autonomous person, and the challenges of autonomy to our ideas about the good life are fundamental to our mental health. To make sense of these teal lunges, we have to look at the experiential character of what we care about, and try to clarify the normative structure of our care and caring.

Care and Caring The notion of care was introduced into phenomenology in 1927 by Martin Heidegger in his epochal work Being and Time. The notion of care is central to Heidegger’s endeavor to produce a theory of what it is to be human, an ontology, that is radically different from the traditional understanding in Western philosophy of human be Dings as primarily rational beings whose existence is and should be constituted by cogni Lively transparent norms and values secured by logic and reason. Heidegger does not de ny that human beings are rational beings who orient themselves through cognitive norms Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics and values. He does argue, though, that the idea of rationality has overshadowed the fact that human beings are also Effective beings whose existence is saturated with feelings that they have not chosen and that they cannot make sense of (Heidegger 2010: 130). Hu man beings find themselves in the world and are engaged with the world before they try to understand the world and their place in it. We find ourselves in the world in a certain way. The world affects us and matters to us before we attempt to make reflective sense of what we care about. As Heidegger writes, in and through care a human being “is always already brought before itself, it has always already found itself, not as perceiving oneself to be there, but as one finds one’s self in attunement” ( Heidegger 2010: 132). We do not freely choose what we care about. We find ourselves Effectively entangled with the world and other people to the extent that it is difficult to maintain a sense of identity. This means that we have to make sense of what we care about in order to understand who we are and how we actually want to live our life (Heidegger 2010: 307–309). Heidegger’s analysis of care as the ontological structure of human existence brings out the normative character of human experience. Our existence matters to us, and we care about the world, other people, and ourselves. We cannot escape the normative structures of xis Fence or the more or less articulate demands that those structures lay upon us. As Simon Blackburn cogently puts it, “ there is no getting behind ethics. It comes unbidden. It comes with living” ( Blackburn 1998: 2; emphasis in the original). Heidegger dissociative identity disorder not antic late the ethical implications of his understanding of care. His account of normativity re Gained impersonal and, as Karl Jasper has pointed out, strangely solipsistic (Jasper 1978: 33). One could argue that Heidegger’s notion of care is a care without caring and that his account of normativity is a normativity without ethics. Nonetheless, his analysis of the normative complexity of care provided the foundation for several subsequent phe nomenological investigations into the ethical character of human experience.

Among the most influential of these are the works of the French philosophers Emmanuel Levinas and Paul Ricoeur. Both philosophers are deeply indebted to Kant’s notion of duty to humanity, and both are critical of what they understand to be Heidegger’s impersonal understanding of normativity (Levinas 2001: 81–82; Ricoeur 2004: 9–10). Our lives are (p. 978) entangled the lives of other people, and an account of care without a duty to act ally care about the concrete person in front of me is, for both philosophers, deeply prob lematic. We exist as persons together with other persons, and the interpersonal character of human existence makes ethics a fundamental part of what we care about. This fund mental role of ethics is inscribed in the normative structure of human experience. The phenomenology that we find in the work of Levinas and Ricoeur is oriented toward show ing that the normative duty to humanity is not a demand arbitrarily or contingently im posed on human beings. That is to say, that the demand is not rooted in a specific culture al, social, or philosophical conception of human nature. It is constitutive of human expert Once. Seeing the other is experiencing the duty to take care of the other. It is an ethics that, so to say, grows out of experience. The other person matters to me whether I want to acknowledge it or not. In fact, I cannot escape the other. She is part of my life, and her simple presence is an ethical demand to me as a person. and values. He does argue, though, that the idea of rationality has overshadowed the fact that human beings are also Effective beings whose existence is saturated with feelings that they have not chosen and that they cannot make sense of (Heidegger 2010: 130). Hu man beings find themselves in the world and are engaged with the world before they try to understand the world and their place in it. We find ourselves in the world in a certain way. The world affects us and matters to us before we attempt to make reflective sense of what we care about. As Heidegger writes, in and through care a human being “is always already brought before itself, it has always already found itself, not as perceiving oneself to be there, but as one finds one’s self in attunement” ( Heidegger 2010: 132). We do not freely choose what we care about. We find ourselves Effectively entangled with the world and other people to the extent that it is difficult to maintain a sense of identity. This means that we have to make sense of what we care about in order to understand who we are and how we actually want to live our life (Heidegger 2010: 307–309). Heidegger’s analysis of care as the ontological structure of human existence brings out the normative character of human experience. Our existence matters to us, and we care about the world, other people, and ourselves. We cannot escape the normative structures of xis Fence or the more or less articulate demands that those structures lay upon us. As Simon Blackburn cogently puts it, “ there is no getting behind ethics. It comes unbidden. It comes with living” ( Blackburn 1998: 2; emphasis in the original). Heidegger dissociative identity disorder not antic late the ethical implications of his understanding of care. His account of normativity re Gained impersonal and, as Karl Jasper has pointed out, strangely solipsistic (Jasper 1978: 33). One could argue that Heidegger’s notion of care is a care without caring and that his account of normativity is a normativity without ethics. Nonetheless, his analysis of the normative complexity of care provided the foundation for several subsequent phe nomenological investigations into the ethical character of human experience.

Among the most influential of these are the works of the French philosophers Emmanuel Levinas and Paul Ricoeur. Both philosophers are deeply indebted to Kant’s notion of duty to humanity, and both are critical of what they understand to be Heidegger’s impersonal understanding of normativity (Levinas 2001: 81–82; Ricoeur 2004: 9–10). Our lives are (p. 978) entangled the lives of other people, and an account of care without a duty to act ally care about the concrete person in front of me is, for both philosophers, deeply prob lematic. We exist as persons together with other persons, and the interpersonal character of human existence makes ethics a fundamental part of what we care about. This fund mental role of ethics is inscribed in the normative structure of human experience. The phenomenology that we find in the work of Levinas and Ricoeur is oriented toward show ing that the normative duty to humanity is not a demand arbitrarily or contingently im posed on human beings. That is to say, that the demand is not rooted in a specific culture al, social, or philosophical conception of human nature. It is constitutive of human expert Once. Seeing the other is experiencing the duty to take care of the other. It is an ethics that, so to say, grows out of experience. The other person matters to me whether I want to acknowledge it or not. In fact, I cannot escape the other. She is part of my life, and her simple presence is an ethical demand to me as a person.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics This personal character of ethics, the experiential force of ethical obligations, comes out most vigorously in the philosophical poetry of Levinas: The face with which the Other turns to me is not reabsorbed in a representation of a face. To hear his destitution which cries out for justice is not to represent an im age to oneself, but is to posit oneself as responsible, both as more and as less than the being that presents itself in the face. The being that presents himself in the face comes from a dimension of height, a dimension of transcendence whereby he can present himself as a stranger without opposing me as obstacle or enemy.

More, for my position as I consists in being able to respond to the essential desti tuition of the other, finding resources for myself. The Other who dominates me in his transcendence is thus the stranger, the widow, and the orphan, to whom I am obligated.

(Levinas 1969: 215)

The ethical obligation at the core of the duty to humanity—and the many ways this duty challenges my understanding of a good life—has rarely, if ever, been articulated more concretely or argued for more conspicuously than in the works of Levinas. The ethics of Levinas is radical in the sense that it explicitly argues for an asymmetric account of inter personal relationship. We are infinitely responsible for the other, and we can never extra ate ourselves from this responsibility. Our duty to the humanity of the concrete person in front of us should overshadow our care for living a good life. Levinas is not concerned with developing an ethics that combines the duty to humanity with our ideas about living a good life. On the contrary, Levinas argues against such attempts to accommodate our duty to the other with our care for ourselves. I have a duty to care for the other. My other cares and concerns must fade into the background in the encounter with the other per son. The ethical approach of Levinas demands that I sacrifice my ideas of my good life for the other. I must “forget myself for my neighbor who looks at me” accepting that “[s]Sacrifice is the norm and criterion of the approach” ( Levinas 1996: 76).

Levinas’s radical phenomenological ethics constitutes an enduring contribution to psych attic ethics. His phenomenological examinations of how the encounter with the other per son challenges our ideas about what it means to be human making evident the conceptual shortcomings of our attempts to understand a concrete person. The medical environment can prefigure our vision, and our professional expertise can make us blind to the concrete individual who experiences and communicates his suffering. Levinas teaches us to see the person in the patient in front of us. Instead of understanding the other with our ideas (p. 979) and concepts, we have a responsibility for allowing the other to exist as a con Crete person who we can never fully understand. We should, in other words, complement our heteronomous conceptual and symptomatic approach to the patient with an approach that allows for the autonomous suffering of this concrete person (Levinas 1998:148). In this sense, the ethics of Levinas is a constant and vital reminder to actually see the other person in the patient in front of us.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics A phenomenological approach to psychopathology can contribute with more than an antic late and nuanced account of this vital demand to treat the patient as a person. The phe nomenological approach also produces philosophical resources to make sense of how ethics plays into mental suffering in terms of the experienced tension between our ideas about the good life and the duty to humanity. To explore this question, we can turn to Paul Ricoeur in whose ethics we find an account of human identity that combines our ideas of the good life with the duty to humanity.

The Challenges of Autonomy Ricoeur constructs his ethics upon autonomy. To be human is to be autonomous, and a hu man life is the story of our effort to affirm our autonomy through the challenges of other Bess. He develops this ethics of autonomy through phenomenological investigations of the tension between selfhood and otherness constitutive of human self-awareness. We be come aware of being a self through the experience of otherness. This otherness is not dif ferment from or somehow distinct from me. It is an otherness that I am. I am an embodied, situated, and social being, and I experience myself through the encounter with the other Bess of my body, the world, and other people.

This intimate otherness is implicitly manifest in bodily experience. I feel, think, and act through my body, and in this sense my body is an integral part of my pre-reflective aware Bess of being a self and constitutive of my sense of agency. I use my body to live my life thus making my body an organ of my autonomy. And yet my body is also a heteronomous organism among other biophysical organisms in nature, and as such subject to the agony Nous functions and conditions of the natural world (Ricoeur 1992: 127). My body re quires food, water, exercise, and sleep. My body ages, becomes sick, and eventually dies in spite of what I do. In and through my bodily experience I encounter an otherness that I am and yet that I may not want to be. This becomes obvious in the fact that I am not en Direly in control of what I care about. My body has needs that may surprise, disgust, and even frighten me. And yet these needs are my needs although I do not identify with them. In Ricoeur’s words, I have to live “with the otherness of the flesh that I am” ( Ricoeur 1992: 326). This experiential tension between selfhood and otherness springs from our sense of autonomy, from our sense of agency and ownership, and the various challenges to this sense of autonomy are fundamental to our understanding of who we are. Other Bess is constitutive of human identity. As seen with the experience of our own body, we experience who we are through the experience of passivity. This passivity constantly teal lunges our endeavor to become who we want to be, and through the experience of these challenges we discover that our identity is not entirely of our making, but constituted by that over which we have little or no control. In other words, we have to find ourselves through a passivity that is an inescapable part of our identity. The (p. 980) relation be tween selfhood and otherness in human identity is thus dialectical in the sense that we cannot understand selfhood without otherness or vice versa.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics Our endeavors to understand ourselves are disturbed by the experience of not being who we want to be. The experiential fact that human self-understanding “hold together, side by side, the serene affirmation I am and the poignant doubt Who am I? ” (Ricoeur 2004: 259) makes human identity constitutively fragile. To exist as a person, Ricoeur argues, is therefore to reappropriate oneself through the fragility of one’s identity ( Ricoeur 1970: 472). This reappropriation of our identity is not a choice, that is, it is not something that we can choose not to do. We can escape neither our fragility nor our autonomy. Ricoeur adopts Kant’s duty to humanity, and he develops a phenomenological articulation of the notion of autonomy that is fundamental to Kant’s understanding of humanity. Unlike Lev ins and more in line with Kant, Ricoeur argues that the duty to humanity involves a re Aspect for the autonomy of oneself as well as for the autonomy of the other: “Humanity is a way of treating human beings. This means neither you nor I. It is the practical ideal of ‘the self’ in you as well as me” ( Ricoeur 1986: 72; translation slightly modified). We can not construct a life through the sacrifice of our autonomy for the other. We have the duty to respect our own autonomy even through the most terrible experiences of suffering and loss. “The human being,” Ricoeur states, “is the Joy of Yes in the sadness of the finite” (Ri coeur 1986: 140). He elaborates on this statement elsewhere: [A] meditation on unswerving necessity reaches its limit in the exultation of free dom, in the resumption of responsibility by means of which I exclaim: I am the one who moves this body which carries me and betrays me. I change this world which situates me and creates me according to the flesh. I give rise to being within and without myself through my choice.

(Ricoeur 1966: 482–483; translation modified)

We experience the challenge of autonomy through the desire to create our own life or at least to find ourselves as ourselves in the life that we have been given. Every human be ing is a person, and yet to be a person is to care about being a certain kind of person. Our sense of autonomy is entangled with our dreams, hopes, and ideas about who we want to be, and we cannot escape this experience of being more than—or at least different from— what we are and what other people understand us to be. The paradox of autonomy is that our capacity to self-determine our life, to realize ourselves as the persons that we want to be, is also the very capacity that makes us feel at unease with ourselves. Our sense of au tonomy makes our identity fragile because we are faced with the task of trying to hold our identity together through the encounter with otherness. We are responsible for our identity, and yet our identity is not of our own making. Nor can we understand who we are without understanding that our life is ineradicable interwoven with the life of other people.

The intimate otherness that we first experience through our own body makes itself known as the desire for the otherness of the other person in our thinking about the good life. In the desire for the other person, we find that otherness of the other person is as fund mentally constitutive of our identity as is the otherness of our body. And as is the case with my body, the other person is of course a challenge to my autonomy. He can say no to Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics me, insult me, hurt me, or be a concrete obstacle to the realization of my ambition. I nev ertheless need this person to recognize me as an autonomous person. My autonomy is in this sense entangled with the autonomy of the other person. The recognition of my Futon omy is, according to Ricoeur, only possible through the recognition of the autonomy of the other person (Ricoeur 2005: 89–93). I need the other to want to see me as a person. This need for the other is entangled with an (p. 981) almost visceral sense of justice. I depend upon the recognition from the other, and my own recognition of the other as an au tonomous person is, in turn, necessary for this recognition to actually satisfy my own need. In other words, I need the other to complete me: [T]he demand for justice is like hunger and like thirst. This means that the faculty of desiring is broader than organic concern. I am a lacuna and a lack of something other than bread and water... In the last analysis, it is the other who counts. We must always return to this. It is thus the good of the other which I lack. The “I” is empty with respect to the other “I.” He completes me, just as food does. The being of the subject is not solipsistic; it is being-in-common. In this way the sphere of in tersubjective relations can be the analog of the organic sphere, and the world of need can provide the fundamental metaphor of appetite: the other “I,” like the “not-I”– as for example nourishment—comes to fill up my lack... The community is my good because it leads towards making me whole within the “we” where the lacuna of my being would be filled. In some moments of precious communion I sense tentatively that the isolated self is perhaps only a segment torn from such others who could have become a you for me.

(Ricoeur 1966: 127–128; translation modified)

My identity is constituted by the otherness of the other person. I experience myself as a self through the other, and only through recognizing the otherness of the other can I be come the person that I want to be. In this sense, Ricoeur uses phenomenology to articu late how our ideas of a good life depend upon a duty to humanity. This phenomenological work brings out the fragile character of human identity through the dialectics of selfhood and otherness. Our autonomy is challenged by an otherness that is part of who we are. We need this otherness to be the persons that we are, and yet this otherness can also dis Curb our sense of identity to the extent that we lose our sense of identity.

The ethics of Ricoeur brings out the fragility of human identity through the dialectics of selfhood and otherness. This dialectics is experienced in and through the challenge of hu man autonomy. The challenge of autonomy is not merely the experience of passivity in the encounter with the otherness of our body, the world, and other people. Autonomy is also experienced as a challenge through my desire to construct a good life for myself. I expert Once a need to make my life mine. The merit of Ricoeur’s ethics consists in his phenom nological articulation of how this desire of autonomy can only be satisfied through the otherness that I am, that is, my body, the world, and most important the autonomy of the other person. Our recognition of autonomy—in ourselves and in the other—entails a de and of responsibility. We are responsible for reappropriating ourselves through our Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics fragility. We experience ourselves to be, and other people expect us to be, responsible for how we live our life, and yet human responsibility is fragile. In the concluding section that follows, we will use Ricoeur’s phenomenological articulation of what we could call the strength of fragility to argue that the notion of fragility is the conceptual link that allows us to see how ethics is not merely an external perspective on psychiatry but a necessary element of our attempt to understand mental illness.

The Strength of Fragility The question of responsibility is central to psychiatry. Recognizing the patient as an au tonomous person entails the problem of how to make sense of the demand of responsibili ty that (p. 982) is constitutive of the idea of autonomy. How do we treat the patient as an autonomous person without making him responsible for his illness? What are we to do with the problem of stigma, that is, how do we avoid producing feelings of shame and fear of blame in the patient when introducing talk about responsibility? These questions con corning how to approach the patient are rendered all the more urgent by the fact that ex perience of responsibility plays a central role in how the patient experiences her illness. The experience of autonomy and the ensuing problem of responsibility is one of the cor nerstones of Karl Jasper’s formative account of psychopathology, particularly in his insist Fence on the importance of the patient’s attitude to his illness: The will can interfere with the psyche which it may darken or illuminate, inhibit or yield to, inflate in some respect or repress in another. When the individual is ill, there are various possibilities open to him in so far as a state of illness is not an objective biological condition but a subjective state as well, in the form of an awareness of the illness. This latter is not merely something that happens along side the illness, the mere reflection of its consciousness, but it is an effective fac tor which is an actual link in the morbid state itself.

(Jasper 1997: 424)

Ricoeur’s account of the strength of fragility can clarify and make sense of the role of re sponsibility in mental illness. The dialectics of selfhood and otherness produce our identi ty, and it is this dialectics that makes our identity fragile. Understanding responsibility through the fragile character of human identity allows for a perspective on mental illness that avoids two dehumanizing approaches to mental illness: a biological approach that fo cuties exclusively on the impersonal otherness of mental illness and a moralizing ap roach that understands mental illness exclusively as a problem of the self. The dehuman zing effect in these approaches lies in their respective approach to autonomy and the consequent understanding of the role of responsibility in mental illness. The presentation of these approaches is not a description of actual psychiatric approaches, but a construe son of two opposite extremes within which contemporary mental health care is conduct ed. The drawing up of these extremes serves as a way to bring out two attitudes of dehu manization that are present in mental health care in less extreme forms.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics The first of these ways of dehumanizing the patient is to adopt a biological approach that explains mental illness exclusively in terms of an impersonal biological functionalism. This approach reduces the patient to a hapless victim of genetic or neuronal malfunction ing, and thereby eliminates or at least sidesteps the autonomy that we experience as fun damental to our humanity. The biological approach is often considered to be beneficial be cause of the hope that a medicalized approach can reduce the stigma that sadly still haunts people who suffer from a mental illness. A genetic or neurological biological expla nation of mental illness relieves the patient of responsibility for her illness, and without talk about responsibility the patient will no longer have to endure blame, discrimination, or social exclusion because of her mental suffering. There is no evidence, however, that decades of a near hegemony of biological ex plantations of mental illness has reduced the stigma of mental illness. Biological ex plantations can actually increase the public fear of persons with mental illnesses because of the impersonal character of the illness, and they do not necessarily make patients themselves feel less guilty about their illness (Rüsch et al. 2010; Read et al. 2006). The problem with this argument for the biological (p. 983) dehumanization of mental illness is, as Jasper points out in the quote above, that an impersonal biological explanation does not eliminate the subjective or experiential feature of a mental illness. Autonomy is con stitutive of human experience. We experience the world, other people, and ourselves through a sense of selfhood, and the demand of responsibility comes, as we have seen, unbidden with our sense of being an autonomous person. It therefore seems impossible to eliminate the idea of responsibility, both on the part of the patient and in the eye of pub lic. Persons who suffer from a mental illness cannot escape the feeling of responsibility, and people who interact with a mentally ill person are frightened by the conception of an anonymous and therefore completely irresponsible—in the etymological sense of not be ing answerable—conception of mental illness.

The other way of dehumanizing the patient is to approach mental illness as exclusively a problem of the self. This approach is not as easy to individuate or as theoretically clearcut as the biological approach. While the biological approach to mental illness grows out of a consolidated biomedical model that openly—and some would say proudly—aims at re moving from or at least significantly reducing the subjective factor in the account of men tal illness, the moralizing approach is more Promethean in character, and is perhaps more adequately characterized as an implicit cultural attitude rather than an acknowledged theoretical approach. This attitude dehumanizes the patient by making the patient more responsible for her illness or for her recovery than is actually humanly possible. This strong notion of responsibility is fostered by a problematic conflation of autonomy with the moral idea of freedom. The capacity to give laws unto oneself, to self-determine one self, is not the same as being free to do whatever one wants to do. Human autonomy is not free in this sense. We have a sense of autonomy, and we experience ourselves as Napa ble of and responsible for determining our own life, but this experience of being a self is rooted in what Ricoeur calls the otherness of our body, the world, and other people. Hu man freedom is experience of the difficulty of freedom, and such “human freedom is,” as The first of these ways of dehumanizing the patient is to adopt a biological approach that explains mental illness exclusively in terms of an impersonal biological functionalism. This approach reduces the patient to a hapless victim of genetic or neuronal malfunction ing, and thereby eliminates or at least sidesteps the autonomy that we experience as fun damental to our humanity. The biological approach is often considered to be beneficial be cause of the hope that a medicalized approach can reduce the stigma that sadly still haunts people who suffer from a mental illness. A genetic or neurological biological expla nation of mental illness relieves the patient of responsibility for her illness, and without talk about responsibility the patient will no longer have to endure blame, discrimination, or social exclusion because of her mental suffering. There is no evidence, however, that decades of a near hegemony of biological ex plantations of mental illness has reduced the stigma of mental illness. Biological ex plantations can actually increase the public fear of persons with mental illnesses because of the impersonal character of the illness, and they do not necessarily make patients themselves feel less guilty about their illness (Rüsch et al. 2010; Read et al. 2006). The problem with this argument for the biological (p. 983) dehumanization of mental illness is, as Jasper points out in the quote above, that an impersonal biological explanation does not eliminate the subjective or experiential feature of a mental illness. Autonomy is con stitutive of human experience. We experience the world, other people, and ourselves through a sense of selfhood, and the demand of responsibility comes, as we have seen, unbidden with our sense of being an autonomous person. It therefore seems impossible to eliminate the idea of responsibility, both on the part of the patient and in the eye of pub lic. Persons who suffer from a mental illness cannot escape the feeling of responsibility, and people who interact with a mentally ill person are frightened by the conception of an anonymous and therefore completely irresponsible—in the etymological sense of not be ing answerable—conception of mental illness.

The other way of dehumanizing the patient is to approach mental illness as exclusively a problem of the self. This approach is not as easy to individuate or as theoretically clearcut as the biological approach. While the biological approach to mental illness grows out of a consolidated biomedical model that openly—and some would say proudly—aims at re moving from or at least significantly reducing the subjective factor in the account of men tal illness, the moralizing approach is more Promethean in character, and is perhaps more adequately characterized as an implicit cultural attitude rather than an acknowledged theoretical approach. This attitude dehumanizes the patient by making the patient more responsible for her illness or for her recovery than is actually humanly possible. This strong notion of responsibility is fostered by a problematic conflation of autonomy with the moral idea of freedom. The capacity to give laws unto oneself, to self-determine one self, is not the same as being free to do whatever one wants to do. Human autonomy is not free in this sense. We have a sense of autonomy, and we experience ourselves as Napa ble of and responsible for determining our own life, but this experience of being a self is rooted in what Ricoeur calls the otherness of our body, the world, and other people. Hu man freedom is experience of the difficulty of freedom, and such “human freedom is,” as Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics Ricoeur argues, “a dependent independence, a receptive initiative” ( Ricoeur 2007: 228). As with the biological approach, this moralistic version of dehumanization rarely comes in a clear and undiluted form—although explicit moralistic accounts can be found in some religious approaches to mental illness, and in the public debate about eating disorders and addictive disorders. The moral zing attitude is, however, an always present danger for the patient, the public, and the therapist when thinking about or debating whether or not a concrete case qualifies as a mental illness. Once again we cannot but structure our experience and understanding of human beings around the notion of autonomy. The dehumanizing effect of the moralizing approach consists in transforming the experience of autonomy into a moral ideal of hu man freedom that disregards the concrete challenges of otherness that make our autono my human.

The lesson that we can draw from these two ways of dehumanizing the patient is that the sense of autonomy that structures human experience means that we cannot avoid the no son of responsibility when trying to understand mental illness. The notion of responsibili ty is fundamental to our experience of what it means to be human, but the experience of responsibility never comes with the purity or clarity that we find in our conceptual con strict of responsibility. The lived experience of responsibility is vital to our sense of being a self, and the normative concept of responsibility functions as an explicit point of orient son for our endeavor to make sense of who we are and how to live a good life. The expert Once of responsibility is inescapably subjective while the concept of responsibility be comes (p. 984) a norm by disregarding the individuality constitutive of the experience of responsibility. The challenge of thinking about responsibility consists in the fact that we cannot disregard either of these perspectives on responsibility. We understand our identi ty through our experience of being responsible, and at the same time we experience re sponsibility as a normative challenge. This obscure role that responsibility plays in our sense of identity brings out the importance of the notion of fragility that Ricoeur articular ed through his phenomenological ethics.

The lesson that we can draw from these two ways of dehumanizing the patient is that the sense of autonomy that structures human experience means that we cannot avoid the no son of responsibility when trying to understand mental illness. The notion of responsibili ty is fundamental to our experience of what it means to be human, but the experience of responsibility never comes with the purity or clarity that we find in our conceptual con strict of responsibility. The lived experience of responsibility is vital to our sense of being a self, and the normative concept of responsibility functions as an explicit point of orient son for our endeavor to make sense of who we are and how to live a good life. The expert Once of responsibility is inescapably subjective while the concept of responsibility be comes (p. 984) a norm by disregarding the individuality constitutive of the experience of responsibility. The challenge of thinking about responsibility consists in the fact that we cannot disregard either of these perspectives on responsibility. We understand our identi ty through our experience of being responsible, and at the same time we experience re sponsibility as a normative challenge. This obscure role that responsibility plays in our sense of identity brings out the importance of the notion of fragility that Ricoeur articular ed through his phenomenological ethics.

The notion of fragility can function as a conceptual link between the (descriptive) under standing of mental illness and the (normative) practice of mental health care. Human identity is fragile because of the dialectics of selfhood and otherness constitutive of what humans care about. Mental illness is an illness of experience, and the notion of fragility allows us to articulate and make sense of the importance of care in mental suffering. We suffer through disturbances of what we care about, and our suffering is marked by what we care about. The recognition of this experiential fragility at the core of mental illness requires an acknowledgment and acceptance of an explanatory fragility in the sense that our various conceptual approaches to mental illness allow for the autonomy of suffering of the concrete person in front of us. Only by acknowledging the fragile character of our approach to the patient are we capable of recognizing that the vulnerability that makes the patient suffer is an expression of the fragility that makes her a person. One of the most important contributions of phenomenological psychopathology to psychiatric ethics is this notion of fragility. To be human is to be fragile. Fragility is not something to over come or be rid of. It is both a phenomenon and a norm. Human experience is inescapably Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics fragile, and only by recognizing this fragility—in ourselves and in the other person—can we hope for recovery. Bibliography Aristotle. “Nicomachean Ethics,” trans. W.D. Ross and J.O. Urmson. In J. Barnes (ed.) The Works of Aristotle, vol. 2, pp. 1729–1867. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Austin J. C. and Honer W. G.. “The Gnomic Era and Serious Mental Illness: A Po tential Application for Psychiatric Genetic Counseling.” Psychiatric Services 58: 254–261. Beauchamp T. L. and Childless J. F.. Principles of Biomedical Ethics, 7th edn. Ox ford: Oxford University Press. Bentall R.. Doctoring the Mind: Why Psychiatric Treatments Fail. London: Allen Lane. Blackburn S.. Ruling Passion. A Theory of Practical Reasoning. Oxford: Oxford Uni varsity Press. Bloch S. and Green S. A.. “An Ethical Framework for Psychiatry.” British Journal of Psychiatry 188: 7–12. Easter M. M.. ““Not All My Fault”: Genetics, Stigma, and Personal Responsibility for Women with Eating Disorders.” Social Science & Medicine 75: 1408–1416. Frank L. E. and Bagel S. K.. “Addiction and Moralization: the Role of the Underlay ing Model of Addiction.” Neuroethics 10: 129–139. Gerhardt fifth.. Selbstbestimmung: Das Principe der Individualistät. Stuttgart: Reclaim.

(p. 985) Heidegger M.. Being and Time, trans. J. Stambaugh, revised by D.J. Sch milt. New York: State University of New York Press. Idles J., Lombera S., Rosenberg J., and Arrow B.. “In the Mind’s Eye: Provider and patient Attitudes on Functional Brain Imaging.” Journal of Psychiatric Research 43: 107– 114. Intel T. R. and Cuthbert B. N.. “Brain Disorders? Precisely: Precision Medicine Comes to Psychiatry.” Science 348: 499–500. Jasper K.. Notizen zu Martin Heidegger, ed. H. Saner. München: R. Piper & Co. Verlag. Jasper K.. General Psychopathology, trans. J. Hoeing and M. W. Hamilton. Bali more: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics fragile, and only by recognizing this fragility—in ourselves and in the other person—can we hope for recovery. Bibliography Aristotle. “Nicomachean Ethics,” trans. W.D. Ross and J.O. Urmson. In J. Barnes (ed.) The Works of Aristotle, vol. 2, pp. 1729–1867. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Austin J. C. and Honer W. G.. “The Gnomic Era and Serious Mental Illness: A Po tential Application for Psychiatric Genetic Counseling.” Psychiatric Services 58: 254–261. Beauchamp T. L. and Childless J. F.. Principles of Biomedical Ethics, 7th edn. Ox ford: Oxford University Press. Bentall R.. Doctoring the Mind: Why Psychiatric Treatments Fail. London: Allen Lane. Blackburn S.. Ruling Passion. A Theory of Practical Reasoning. Oxford: Oxford Uni varsity Press. Bloch S. and Green S. A.. “An Ethical Framework for Psychiatry.” British Journal of Psychiatry 188: 7–12. Easter M. M.. ““Not All My Fault”: Genetics, Stigma, and Personal Responsibility for Women with Eating Disorders.” Social Science & Medicine 75: 1408–1416. Frank L. E. and Bagel S. K.. “Addiction and Moralization: the Role of the Underlay ing Model of Addiction.” Neuroethics 10: 129–139. Gerhardt fifth.. Selbstbestimmung: Das Principe der Individualistät. Stuttgart: Reclaim.

(p. 985) Heidegger M.. Being and Time, trans. J. Stambaugh, revised by D.J. Sch milt. New York: State University of New York Press. Idles J., Lombera S., Rosenberg J., and Arrow B.. “In the Mind’s Eye: Provider and patient Attitudes on Functional Brain Imaging.” Journal of Psychiatric Research 43: 107– 114. Intel T. R. and Cuthbert B. N.. “Brain Disorders? Precisely: Precision Medicine Comes to Psychiatry.” Science 348: 499–500. Jasper K.. Notizen zu Martin Heidegger, ed. H. Saner. München: R. Piper & Co. Verlag. Jasper K.. General Psychopathology, trans. J. Hoeing and M. W. Hamilton. Bali more: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics Kant I. (1996a). “Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals,” trans. M. J. Gregory. In M. J. Gregory (ed.), Emmanuel Kant: Practical Philosophy, pp. 37–108. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kant I. (1996b). “Critique of Practical Reason,” trans. M. J. Gregory. In M. J. Gregory (ed.), Emmanuel Kant: Practical Philosophy, pp. 132–271. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kendler K. S.. “The Structure of Psychiatric Science.” The American Journal of Psy chiatry 171: 931–938.

Kvaale E. P., Gottdiener W. H., and Haslam N.. “Biogenetic Explanations and Swig ma: A Meta-Analytic Review of Associations Among Laypeople.” Social Science & Jedi cine 96: 95–103.

Levinas E.. Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority, trans. A. Lings. Pitts burgh: Duquesne University Press.

Levinas E.. “Enigma and Phenomenon.” In A. T. Peperzak, S. Critchley, and R. Bernasconi (eating disorders.), Emmanuel Levinas: Basic Philosophical Writings, pp. 65–78. Indianapo lis: Indiana University Press.

Levinas E.. Otherwise than Being or Beyond Essence, trans. A. Lings. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.

Levinas E.. Existence and Existent, trans. A. Lings. Pittsburgh: Duquesne Univer City Press.

Calla A., Goober R, and Garcia A.. “ ‘Mental Illness is Like Any Other Medical Ill Bess’: A Critical Examination of the Statement and Its Impact on Patient Care and Loci ety.” Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience 40: 147–150.

Manganaro P.. Libertyà Lotto le leggy. La filosofia pratica di Kant. Catania: C.U.E.C.M.

Paras J., Sass L. A., and Zahavi D.. “Rediscovering Psychopathology: The Piste mology and Phenomenology of the Psychiatric Object.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 39: 270– 277.

Plato. “Republic,” trans. G. M. A. Rube and C. D. C. Reeve. In J. M. Cooper and D. S. Hutchinson (eating disorders.) Platen: Complete Works, pp. 971–1223. Indianapolis: Hackett Pub Dishing Company.

Madden J.. “Notes towards a Professional Ethics for Psychiatry.” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 36: 52–59.

Madden J. and Saddler J. Z.. The Virtuous Psychiatrist: Character Ethics in Psych attic Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Ethics Read J., Haslam N., Sauce L., and Davies E.. “Prejudice and Schizophrenia: A Re view of the Mental Illness is an Illness Like Any Other Approach.” ActaPsychaitrica Scan dinavica 114: 303–318. Ricoeur P.. Freedom and Nature: The Voluntary and the Involuntary, trans. E. Ko hak. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

(p. 986) Ricoeur P.. Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation, trans. D. Savage. New Haven: Yale University Press. Ricoeur P.. Fallible Man, trans. C. A. Kelley. New York: Fordham University Press. Ricoeur P.. Oneself as Another, trans. K. Blimey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Ricoeur P.. The Conflict of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics, trans. W. Domingo, et al. London: Continuum. Ricoeur P.. The Course of Recognition, trans. D. Pellauer. Cambridge: Harvard Uni varsity Press. Ricoeur P.. Husserl: An Analysis of His Phenomenology, trans. E. G. Ballard and L. E. Embree. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Rüsch N., Corrigan P.W., Todd A. R., and Bodenhausen G. fifth.. “Implicit Self-Stigma in People With Mental Illness.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 198: 150–153. Saddler J. Z., van Stamen W., and Fulford K. W. M. (eating disorders.). The Oxford Handbook of Psychiatric Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Schomerus G., Schwahn C., Holzinger A., Corrigan P. W., Grebe H. J., Marta M. G., and Angermeyer M. C.. “Evolution of Public Attitudes about Mental Illness: A System tic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Alta Psychaitrica Scandinavia 125: 440–452. Scrutton A. P.. “Is Depression a Sin or a Disease? A Critique of Moralizing and Medicalizing Models of Mental Illness.” Journal of Disability & Religion 19: 285–311.

René Rosfort The Søren Kierkegaard Research Center, University of Copenhagen (p. 986) Ricoeur P.. Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation, trans. D. Savage. New Haven: Yale University Press. Ricoeur P.. Fallible Man, trans. C. A. Kelley. New York: Fordham University Press. Ricoeur P.. Oneself as Another, trans. K. Blimey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Ricoeur P.. The Conflict of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics, trans. W. Domingo, et al. London: Continuum. Ricoeur P.. The Course of Recognition, trans. D. Pellauer. Cambridge: Harvard Uni varsity Press. Ricoeur P.. Husserl: An Analysis of His Phenomenology, trans. E. G. Ballard and L. E. Embree. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Rüsch N., Corrigan P.W., Todd A. R., and Bodenhausen G. fifth.. “Implicit Self-Stigma in People With Mental Illness.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 198: 150–153. Saddler J. Z., van Stamen W., and Fulford K. W. M. (eating disorders.). The Oxford Handbook of Psychiatric Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Schomerus G., Schwahn C., Holzinger A., Corrigan P. W., Grebe H. J., Marta M. G., and Angermeyer M. C.. “Evolution of Public Attitudes about Mental Illness: A System tic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Alta Psychaitrica Scandinavia 125: 440–452. Scrutton A. P.. “Is Depression a Sin or a Disease? A Critique of Moralizing and Medicalizing Models of Mental Illness.” Journal of Disability & Religion 19: 285–311.

René Rosfort The Søren Kierkegaard Research Center, University of Copenhagen Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s So Dial Life-World Jake Jackson The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.101 Abstract and Keywords This article discusses contemporary problems in the United States regarding mental ill Bess. It introduces the concept of being epistemically adrift, a concept related to epees temic injustice, but in the sense that too many interdisciplinary disagreements about the nature and existence of mental illness prevents those living with them able to determine how to live flourishing lives. Examining the life-world informed by psychiatry, anti-psych try, and the criminal justice system/mass industrial prison complex through a phenom nological lens, we see that there are many confused notions of responsibility for those with mental illness, leaving them epistemically adrift and left to their own devices for navigating their own lives and health. The article concludes with a call for more open en gagement with the lived experience of individuals in order to better understand how to live within mental disorder.

Keywords: mental illness, epistemic injustice, mass industrial prison complex, criminal justice, psychiatry, antipsychiatry, phenomenology, life-world, lived experience # Introduction: The Cluttered Life-World of Men # tal Illness WITHIN the United States, our societal understanding of mental illness is perpetually un clear and insecure. An uncareful interpretation of contemporary social issues regarding 1 psychopathology would state that we are in a crisis. Any such “crisis” is not a recent one, but has presented as a perpetual crisis for at least the better part of the last century as the United States has had trouble reacting to the phenomenon of mental illness. My in tent in these pages is to tease out some, but not all, of the different overlapping disciple 2 nary attitudes toward mental illness. I am not developing an overt phenomenology here, but rather rely on phenomenological method of pulling apart strands from the life-world of mental illness discussions in the United States. By life-world I mean the Husserlian conception of the rich pre-reflective world of experience, where we find ourselves always Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World already deployed, as “our most immediate and basic reality” ( Paras and Sass 2008: 255). This life-world is (p. 988) inherently social, as our understanding of mental difference is in herently rooted in intersubjective comparisons (Husserl 1954/1970). The life-world in this sense is rich with meaning, but it can at times be hard to discern meaning for oneself. Husserl describes the life-world as the background to our understanding of the world, 3 more particularly our sciences or disciplines. While different sciences/disciplines are tak en up by particular scientists, the sciences quite clearly present themselves at a wider so Dial level. Husserl writes in the Formal and Transcendental Logic that whether sciences and logic be genuine or spurious, we do have experience of them as cultural formations given to us beforehand and bearing within themselves their meaning, their ‘sense’: since they are formations produced indeed by the practice of the scientists and generations of scientists who have been building them.

(Husserl 1969: 8–9; emphasis mine)

Individuals encounter the logins of different disciplines and are free to make sense of both the reason and unreason of the surrounding world (Husserl 1954/1970: 6). To speak of a life-world of mental illness is to speak of an already-deployed fabric of disparate thoughts both from without and within mentally ill individuals, including through differ ent disciplinary approaches to the question. Psychiatry and mental illness do not exist within a vacuum, but are constantly within a complicated world of conflicting social Patti Dudes that are co-determined by these phenomena. I hope to show that there is a serious social need for phenomenological psychopathology where few other attitudes toward mental illness take lived experience seriously. Without a stronger emphasis on phenom nology and lived experience of patients, discussions of mental illness lose focus on what is important in terms of care and living together.

To approach the life-world of psychopathology in the US public is to approach a din of conflicting noises. The most blaring and self-conflicting noise is that of mainstream me dia, which both condemns the mentally ill for their potential of committing heinous crimes but at other times reprieves heinous acts as unavoidable. For example, when Dy Mann Roof massacred nine members of a historic black church in South Carolina in a de liberate hate crime attack, he was more readily identified by the FBI and press as mental ly ill while they avoided discussing racism before the public even knew his name. Roof’s racism was underreported and replaced by a media narrative that blamed mental illness for his attack. The media narrative shifted away from blaming a white su 4 premacist for being a white supremacist to blaming mental disorder. While mental ill Bess may be a factor in a mass shooter’s actions, it is never the sole cause. It is far more statistically likely for a mentally (p. 989) ill individual to be the victim of violence than its 5 perpetrator, yet mental illness is blamed and quickly shirks responsibility from the per 6 petrator in such attacks. The consequences of such media narratives shame mentally dis ordered individuals and often prevent them from seeking treatment either because they do not see such violent behavior in themselves, or for fear of being persecuted. Different Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World disciplines are taken up and understood by individuals as evidence about the world. In this way, our understanding of mental illness is informed by different disciplinary pram ices and attitudes. General social attitudes, while not necessarily held by a mentally ill individual, still directly affect their day-to-day life in trying to navigate and understand their lives. The trouble that I want to outline is that the mentally ill have no clear re course on how to treat or understand their respective conditions as well as their social status or responsibility within American society, especially as there are few disciplines that take lived experience seriously. Mentally ill individuals most often feel at odds with society at large. This sense of alienation and estrangement only worsens when the men tally ill person then faces social stigma. The position of the mentally ill individual trying to make sense of their condition in attempts to have a flourishing life is what I call being epistemically adrift. This is the phenomena of facing too many competing explanations as to what one should do that it becomes nearly impossible to discern what to do with one self, even in regards to understanding whether one has a mental condition or if their an gush is their “choice.” Epistemically adrift with nowhere safe to turn, many mentally dis ordered individuals turn to drastic actions as the only expected social roles for them are those of deviance and self-destruction.

Faced with a cacophony of different competing disciplinary approaches to mental health, those with mental disorders who try to navigate their own care and self-knowledge be come epistemically adrift. This can be, in part, the end result of hermeneutical injustice, a form of epistemic injustice as outlined by Miranda Pricker (2007 ). Hermeneutical injus ice is when an individual of a particular social identity is systematically denied access to knowledge that would be crucial to that individual’s social flourishing. Yet, where Pricker examines cases of hermeneutical injustice a posterior after a paradigmshift in thinking, our general and scientific attitudes to mental illness are too conflicting for there to be a clear analysis of the full extent of hermeneutical injustice. In this case, there is no intended structure that blocks the mentally ill individual from access to knoll edge about their condition, however I argue that it is due to the conflicted life-world of different interpretations of mental difference. The mentally ill experience a knowledge deficit for a multitude of reasons (p. 990) outside of their own mental health, including but not limited to stigma, socio-economic background, race, gender, or political climate. I will not be able to cover all of these possible identity politics problems within this essay, but will highlight a few examples along the way. The import of understanding mental illness socially is that there are many limited yet conflicting resources for the mentally ill to pur sue, without any clear explanation of one’s options. Within this essay, I will discuss sever al problems in three approaches to mental illness, through professional psychiatry, the anti-psychiatry movement, and the criminal justice system. However given the nature of my critique, I find it necessary to state one clear claim: mental disorder is a real phenomenon which affects countless individuals, both aware and unaware of their conj 7 son. The ever-present debate on the existence of mental illness leaves individuals epees temically adrift and unable to determine how to live a flourishing life outside of being de 8 Giant in the face of stigmatizing norms. Whatever the “truth” is to mental illness, it is epistemically covered over within interdisciplinary noise. disciplines are taken up and understood by individuals as evidence about the world. In this way, our understanding of mental illness is informed by different disciplinary pram ices and attitudes. General social attitudes, while not necessarily held by a mentally ill individual, still directly affect their day-to-day life in trying to navigate and understand their lives. The trouble that I want to outline is that the mentally ill have no clear re course on how to treat or understand their respective conditions as well as their social status or responsibility within American society, especially as there are few disciplines that take lived experience seriously. Mentally ill individuals most often feel at odds with society at large. This sense of alienation and estrangement only worsens when the men tally ill person then faces social stigma. The position of the mentally ill individual trying to make sense of their condition in attempts to have a flourishing life is what I call being epistemically adrift. This is the phenomena of facing too many competing explanations as to what one should do that it becomes nearly impossible to discern what to do with one self, even in regards to understanding whether one has a mental condition or if their an gush is their “choice.” Epistemically adrift with nowhere safe to turn, many mentally dis ordered individuals turn to drastic actions as the only expected social roles for them are those of deviance and self-destruction.

Faced with a cacophony of different competing disciplinary approaches to mental health, those with mental disorders who try to navigate their own care and self-knowledge be come epistemically adrift. This can be, in part, the end result of hermeneutical injustice, a form of epistemic injustice as outlined by Miranda Pricker (2007 ). Hermeneutical injus ice is when an individual of a particular social identity is systematically denied access to knowledge that would be crucial to that individual’s social flourishing. Yet, where Pricker examines cases of hermeneutical injustice a posterior after a paradigmshift in thinking, our general and scientific attitudes to mental illness are too conflicting for there to be a clear analysis of the full extent of hermeneutical injustice. In this case, there is no intended structure that blocks the mentally ill individual from access to knoll edge about their condition, however I argue that it is due to the conflicted life-world of different interpretations of mental difference. The mentally ill experience a knowledge deficit for a multitude of reasons (p. 990) outside of their own mental health, including but not limited to stigma, socio-economic background, race, gender, or political climate. I will not be able to cover all of these possible identity politics problems within this essay, but will highlight a few examples along the way. The import of understanding mental illness socially is that there are many limited yet conflicting resources for the mentally ill to pur sue, without any clear explanation of one’s options. Within this essay, I will discuss sever al problems in three approaches to mental illness, through professional psychiatry, the anti-psychiatry movement, and the criminal justice system. However given the nature of my critique, I find it necessary to state one clear claim: mental disorder is a real phenomenon which affects countless individuals, both aware and unaware of their conj 7 son. The ever-present debate on the existence of mental illness leaves individuals epees temically adrift and unable to determine how to live a flourishing life outside of being de 8 Giant in the face of stigmatizing norms. Whatever the “truth” is to mental illness, it is epistemically covered over within interdisciplinary noise.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World # Troubles in Psychiatry To open this section, I provide an anecdote that I believe exemplifies unreflective psych attic attitudes and poor use of diagnostic tools in the public’s cultural understanding. During the abnormal psychology unit of my high school Psychology 101 course, our class held a mock group therapy session. The teacher gave each student a role to play, a jag Gnostic name from the Diagnostic Statistical Manual (DSM) and a set of symptoms. We were then each to play our respective roles for the better part of the class period, then at the end guess who was what diagnosis. Some of us yelled, some ticked, and most laughed both with in and breaking character. I cannot remember the positive lessons of this Lexer Oise, but it is easy to extrapolate negative ones. The game suggests as many no doubt be Sieve that mental disorder is easy to openly recognize, categorize, and dissect through a 9 medical lens. It presents mental disorder as merely reducible to a series of easily imitate ed quirks or behaviors. Further, it suggests that diagnostic tools such as the DSM have the capacity to read into any behavior that one presents, implying that those with euro divergent traits or conditions are easy to spot or deconstruct from a distance, and rein forces mentally ill individuals’ fear of stigma and being a spectacle for being abnormal. Additionally, the game suggests that there is a very typical social sick role that diagnoses play in social interaction, a limited set of possibilities for the mentally ill.

The profession and discipline of psychiatry is indispensable when it comes to explicating and understanding the wide array of mental disorder and divergence. Psychiatry, to put it broadly for the purposes of this essay, is the intersection of social and biological sciences devoted to categorizing and understanding mental health. However, psychiatry has sever al (p. 991) compromising factors both external and internal that diminish its overall Gene fit. Externally, psychiatry is compromised by the general stigma of mental illness that per Fades in our culture. This includes the problems caused by private health insurance com Zanies that limit coverage for mental health treatment beyond prescription coverage for medications. Within the paradigm of private health insurance, lower-income US citizens generally have had difficulty accessing mental health treatment, both in regards to Amer ency care as well as preventive care due to cost of medical treatment out-of-pocket/not covered by insurance. Mental illness has been classified as a non-life-threatening conj son by most private insurers before implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA, or crudely referred to as Obamacare). Without wider mental health insurance coverage, psy chiatry has been effectively delegitimized as a medical field and seen more as a luxury service or emergency care. Before the ACA, mental health practitioners dissociative identity disorder not partici pate in the Medicaid program due to the low reimbursement rate, paying less than 53% of what private insurance companies paid for services (Olson 2016: 986). It is unclear as to how beneficial the ACA will be in the long run for mental health midst its contested history, but there is a clear increase in patients seeking mental health services since its implementation (Creedon and Lê Cook 2016; Weiss, Gross, and Moncrief 2016; Olson 2016 ). The current Trump/Republican administration’s plans to repeal the ACA without any clear plan for its replacement would only lead to increased numbers of adrift individ Gals, that is, they would lead to the destruction of the lifeline that mental health-care re Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World cipients require. The absence of affordable mental health care leaves many not only epees temically adrift, but in further grave danger. However the general trend set from poor in Durance coverage is for mentally ill individuals not to seek therapy, but medications which are generally more likely to be covered and more cost-effective as they can be prescribed by a general practitioner instead of a specialty therapist. Limiting health insurance Gene fits toward mental health limits access to mental health services for those who are impov Perished or otherwise also disadvantaged.

The American Psychiatric Association’s formation and subsequent editions of the DSM has been an attempt to catego Size mental disorder into definitive kinds. However, due to conflicting notions of what mental illness is, the DSM-5 exists in the form of a long, general laundry list of conj 10 sons, disorders, and mental states. There have been many due criticisms of this ap roach as the DSM has grown not only physically but in terms of its influence and use. One major problem is that the existence of the DSM has outweighed other forms of theta pectic engagement. Instead of engaging directly with patients themselves and their own given experience, practitioners are often more concerned with filling out checklists. Nan cy Nyquist Potter writes that “the DSM works together with other epistemic practices that constrict many clinicians’ access to knowing well. Thus clinicians shape themselves into, and are shaped into, a privileged way of knowing that elides many crucial factors that influence the experiences and needs of the person in front of them” (2016: 160). Re lying upon the DSM without critical reflection on its limitations or the experiences of pa taints directly affects the patients’ lives. When overreliance on the DSM continues in a clinical setting, clinicians commit hermeneutical injustices toward their patients. Nancy Andreasen argues that the unintended consequences of the DSM are dehumanizing, writ ing that “History taking—the central evaluation tool in (p. 992) psychiatry—has frequently been reduced to the use of DSM checklists. DSM discourages clinicians from getting to know the patient as an individual person because of its dryly empirical approach” (An dreasen 2006: 111). Andreasen describes this as the death of phenomenology in Amer can psychiatry, which definitely seems to be the case when compared to Karl Jasper’s de and that psychiatrists must take on a phenomenological empathetic approach to pa taints. Jasper writes that psychopathological “experience is best described by the person who has undergone it. Detached psychiatric observation with its own formulation of what the patient is suffering is not any substitute for this” ( Jasper 1959/1963: 55). The DSM’s use implies that priority has been taken on pre-existing categorical definition over rich and ever-changing lived experience that it can never suitably cover.

The American Psychiatric Association’s formation and subsequent editions of the DSM has been an attempt to catego Size mental disorder into definitive kinds. However, due to conflicting notions of what mental illness is, the DSM-5 exists in the form of a long, general laundry list of conj 10 sons, disorders, and mental states. There have been many due criticisms of this ap roach as the DSM has grown not only physically but in terms of its influence and use. One major problem is that the existence of the DSM has outweighed other forms of theta pectic engagement. Instead of engaging directly with patients themselves and their own given experience, practitioners are often more concerned with filling out checklists. Nan cy Nyquist Potter writes that “the DSM works together with other epistemic practices that constrict many clinicians’ access to knowing well. Thus clinicians shape themselves into, and are shaped into, a privileged way of knowing that elides many crucial factors that influence the experiences and needs of the person in front of them” (2016: 160). Re lying upon the DSM without critical reflection on its limitations or the experiences of pa taints directly affects the patients’ lives. When overreliance on the DSM continues in a clinical setting, clinicians commit hermeneutical injustices toward their patients. Nancy Andreasen argues that the unintended consequences of the DSM are dehumanizing, writ ing that “History taking—the central evaluation tool in (p. 992) psychiatry—has frequently been reduced to the use of DSM checklists. DSM discourages clinicians from getting to know the patient as an individual person because of its dryly empirical approach” (An dreasen 2006: 111). Andreasen describes this as the death of phenomenology in Amer can psychiatry, which definitely seems to be the case when compared to Karl Jasper’s de and that psychiatrists must take on a phenomenological empathetic approach to pa taints. Jasper writes that psychopathological “experience is best described by the person who has undergone it. Detached psychiatric observation with its own formulation of what the patient is suffering is not any substitute for this” ( Jasper 1959/1963: 55). The DSM’s use implies that priority has been taken on pre-existing categorical definition over rich and ever-changing lived experience that it can never suitably cover.

The fault of not listening to the lived experience of patients would perhaps be better ex pained by bad tool use. The DSM presents not a totalized description of psychopathology, but rather focuses instead on bare minimum criteria as a diagnostic tool. As a result, the DSM has presented a very uniform and utilitarian description even for conditions that present themselves in unique ways. For example, the DSM-5 states that major depression is experiencing either a depressed mood or lack of interest or pleasure in activities and at least four of the following seven symptoms over a period of time spanning over two weeks: weight/diet changes, changes in sleep patterns, psychomotor problems, fatigue, feeling extreme guilt/worthlessness, problems thinking/concentrating, or continuous/ob Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World sessive thoughts of death/suicide. Depression appears in many different ways for individuals. Depression often feels different, where many sufferers remark upon their experiences in metaphors, yet the DSM’s intention is to have a clear categorical define son that can be easily applied to a wide array of cases. Where an episode can be much shorter than the prescribed two weeks, psychiatrists insist on the duration for accurate results that cover a longer period of time rather than a fleeting episode. The DSM is a mere tool of categorization, but is often confused as a complete map of all possible men tally-divergent experiences. Some clinicians are too reliant upon the DSM and will rush to make the closest available, yet incorrect diagnosis, assuming that there is no psy 11 chopathological conceptual space that is unoccupied by the DSM. In contrast, Rachel Cooper notes that “the rates with which diagnoses are made depend not only on the con tents of the DSM, but also on the economic, cultural, and bureaucratic contexts within which diagnoses are made” (2014: 12). The dry language of the DSM presents a very ob jectivizing attempt at typifying subjective experience. A rush to diagnose based solely on preset diagnostic criteria is a possible case of hermeneutical injustice and leaves the pa taint epistemically adrift and conforming to the wrong treatment plan. The trouble is in confusing the DSM as the ultimate authority in clinical settings when a better under standing must go “back to the things themselves” and engage more directly with the 12 patient’s experience.

Additionally in the case of the DSM, the tool shapes its own use by way of its own nosolo gy and does not consult subjects regarding how it affects them socially. Most infamous is the inclusion of homosexuality as a diagnosis within early versions of the manual, which was only deleted from the DSM-second after extensive campaigning from gay rights activists against (p. 993) such pathologizing in 1973 (Saddler 2005: 204–206). Psychiatrist John Saddler argues that this shows quite clearly that the diagnoses themselves clearly have a value beyond their claims to being “objective” categories. Later versions of the DSM included gender identity disorder, much to the dismay of transgender advocates as the term disorder implies that there is something bad or defective in their identity. The DSM-5 still includes “Gender Identity Disorders” as a general category that outlines “Gender Dysphoria” with criteria which amount to a describing the distressed ex perience that can result from social pressures but not fault the individual’s gender identi ty (American Psychiatric Association 2013: 451-459). While the focus of this disorder’s criteria has justly changed from the identity itself to the distress caused by external swig ma, its continued inclusion presents rationalization for transphobia; claiming that those who identify with a different gender than assigned at birth are possibly mentally-Visor dared unfairly forces all trans-individuals within a psychiatric sick role and perpetuates the stigma around gender identity. The continued inclusion of Gender Dysphoria in the DSM still suggests that trans-individuals are aberrant and disordered, despite gender identity being irreducible along medical or psychiatric models. This still presents opportu City for psychiatric overreach, overdiagnosis, and transphobic stigma, as many trans-Hindi visuals do not feel distress over their identity, but nevertheless face continued stigma un der a medicalized and dehumanizing lens. sessive thoughts of death/suicide. Depression appears in many different ways for individuals. Depression often feels different, where many sufferers remark upon their experiences in metaphors, yet the DSM’s intention is to have a clear categorical define son that can be easily applied to a wide array of cases. Where an episode can be much shorter than the prescribed two weeks, psychiatrists insist on the duration for accurate results that cover a longer period of time rather than a fleeting episode. The DSM is a mere tool of categorization, but is often confused as a complete map of all possible men tally-divergent experiences. Some clinicians are too reliant upon the DSM and will rush to make the closest available, yet incorrect diagnosis, assuming that there is no psy 11 chopathological conceptual space that is unoccupied by the DSM. In contrast, Rachel Cooper notes that “the rates with which diagnoses are made depend not only on the con tents of the DSM, but also on the economic, cultural, and bureaucratic contexts within which diagnoses are made” (2014: 12). The dry language of the DSM presents a very ob jectivizing attempt at typifying subjective experience. A rush to diagnose based solely on preset diagnostic criteria is a possible case of hermeneutical injustice and leaves the pa taint epistemically adrift and conforming to the wrong treatment plan. The trouble is in confusing the DSM as the ultimate authority in clinical settings when a better under standing must go “back to the things themselves” and engage more directly with the 12 patient’s experience.

Additionally in the case of the DSM, the tool shapes its own use by way of its own nosolo gy and does not consult subjects regarding how it affects them socially. Most infamous is the inclusion of homosexuality as a diagnosis within early versions of the manual, which was only deleted from the DSM-second after extensive campaigning from gay rights activists against (p. 993) such pathologizing in 1973 (Saddler 2005: 204–206). Psychiatrist John Saddler argues that this shows quite clearly that the diagnoses themselves clearly have a value beyond their claims to being “objective” categories. Later versions of the DSM included gender identity disorder, much to the dismay of transgender advocates as the term disorder implies that there is something bad or defective in their identity. The DSM-5 still includes “Gender Identity Disorders” as a general category that outlines “Gender Dysphoria” with criteria which amount to a describing the distressed ex perience that can result from social pressures but not fault the individual’s gender identi ty (American Psychiatric Association 2013: 451-459). While the focus of this disorder’s criteria has justly changed from the identity itself to the distress caused by external swig ma, its continued inclusion presents rationalization for transphobia; claiming that those who identify with a different gender than assigned at birth are possibly mentally-Visor dared unfairly forces all trans-individuals within a psychiatric sick role and perpetuates the stigma around gender identity. The continued inclusion of Gender Dysphoria in the DSM still suggests that trans-individuals are aberrant and disordered, despite gender identity being irreducible along medical or psychiatric models. This still presents opportu City for psychiatric overreach, overdiagnosis, and transphobic stigma, as many trans-Hindi visuals do not feel distress over their identity, but nevertheless face continued stigma un der a medicalized and dehumanizing lens.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World Another dubious historical problem in nosology is highlighted by Jonathan Metal’s The Protest Psychosis where the very language used to describe schizophrenia changed be tween the DSM and the DSM-second. Metal argues that the changes in diagnostic criteria lan gauge was implicitly racist as it more readily described and pathologized protest as men tal illness, leading to a growth in diagnoses for African-American men in the late ’60s and 13 ’70s (Metal 2009: 98). Based on events like Metal describes, there have been many questions as to whether the terminology and history of schizophrenia is stigmatizing. Schizophrenia as a concept has a sordid history where the term is completely misunderstood by the general public thanks to its changes as a diagnosis as well as pop-culture references. There have been many attempts to change or rename the condition altogether as Lasalvia et al. note, but one resounding fear is that changing the name will only cause for more confusion for those seeking or administering treatment (ibid.).

A final but less grievous example of the DSM instructing its own tool use is the removal of Asperger’s syndrome from the DSM-5, lumping it instead within autism spectrum Visor der (autism spectrum disorder). According to Miriam Solomon, this erasure has led to a loss of diagnostic meaning or identity for those previously diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome. She argues that since the DSM has no consideration for patient interests in creating or changing di agnostic categories, those who have found value in the Asperger’s identity now suffer from hermeneutical injustice, albeit Solomon is unsure whether this loss of diagnostic identity is an active harm against those who otherwise identify as having Asperger’s 14. The DSM is a tool geared toward the purposes of diagnosis, which of ten leaves patients desolate and adrift of making any meaning for themselves.

A final but less grievous example of the DSM instructing its own tool use is the removal of Asperger’s syndrome from the DSM-5, lumping it instead within autism spectrum Visor der (autism spectrum disorder). According to Miriam Solomon, this erasure has led to a loss of diagnostic meaning or identity for those previously diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome. She argues that since the DSM has no consideration for patient interests in creating or changing di agnostic categories, those who have found value in the Asperger’s identity now suffer from hermeneutical injustice, albeit Solomon is unsure whether this loss of diagnostic identity is an active harm against those who otherwise identify as having Asperger’s 14. The DSM is a tool geared toward the purposes of diagnosis, which of ten leaves patients desolate and adrift of making any meaning for themselves.

(p. 994) Oftentimes mental illness stigma and poor psychiatric ethics appear in the polite cal sphere, as we have seen again recently in the 2016 US presidential election and sub sequent conversations about Donald Trump’s policies, executive orders, and behavior as President. The grassroots social media call to #DiagnoseTrump over the summer of 2016 presented yet another betrayal of stigmatizing attitudes against mental illness from both 15 outside and within the mental health field. The call and pull of this particular movement became great enough that the American Psychiatric Association’s president, Maria Oquendo, had to step in to remind mental health professionals of the notorious Goldwater Rule: that it is a breach of ethics to diagnose a public figure from afar. This rule was implemented in 1973 after a public outcry that Senator Barry Goldwater’s 1964 candidacy for presidency had likely been ruined in part by a survey of psychiatric professionals who agreed that he was unfit, many of whom offering a wide array of unsolicited diagnoses. Oquendo’s reminder came after multiple mental health professionals had already weighed in on Donald Trump’s mental health and had given him armchair diagnoses of narcissistic personality disorder against American Psychiatric Association ethics. Since his electoral college win and inaugural son, the resistance to Trump’s presidency has only increased in references to his mental health, ramping up claims about narcissistic personality disorder as well as speculation that his erratic behavior can be blamed on his use of Propecia and the drug’s “mental confusion” sideeffects. The calls for diagnosing Trump even includes fed real legislators, such as Congressman Ted Lieu from California, who for example, has Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World tweeted “Last 24 hrs on Twitter, @realDonaldTrump went on rant about ‘death & destruct son,’ ‘FAKE NEWS,’ & ‘evil.’ Should he get mental health exam?” ( Lieu February 4, 2017 11:AM EST). Lieu went on further to state to a reply to this tweet that “we are invest 16 gating” what grounds are possible to remove Trump over mental illness (ibid.). Again as mentioned in the previous footnote, there are countless reasons to move to impeach or re move Trump from presidency, but the implication of medicalized reasons to remove him create a horrifying precedent for governmental overreach of biopolitics and patient privy 17 cy.

But despite the increasing politicizing of Trump’s mental health, there have been several within the psychiatric profession who actively resist the armchair reflections and bad medicalization inherent in trying to diagnose someone with mental disorder to declare them “unfit” to rule. Allen J Frances, the author of the DSM-5 criteria for narcissistic per Tonality disorder himself, has come out to speak against the move to try to diagnose Trump from a distance. Frances states that despite many armchair psychologist jag noses, Trump does not fit the criterion that narcissism causes “clinically significant dis tress or impairment”. The question of “significant distress or impairment” points out yet another (p. 995) issue with the DSM-5; it is designed to trace out disorder and suffering but finds no positive diagnostic value in contentment or flourishing. Nobody psychopathologizes the happy. Yet, I must question Frances’s decision to weigh in against the armchair diagnosis debate by still hypocritically directly offering a diagnostic opinion in assessing Trump’s sense of distress without consultation.

Frances then states that “Dismissing Trump as simply mad paradoxically reduces our ability to deal with his actions” (ibid.). Beyond the violation of ethics, the public’s specula son and call for pathologizing Trump’s behavior again shows an ugly attitude against the mentally ill and deflects our responsibility for handling his policies. This is rooted in the popular assumption that mentally ill individuals are inherently evil or at very least income patent. These attempts to diagnose from the armchair show that everyday mental illness stigma has not left even those practicing psychiatry. No matter the state of a politician’s mental health, to call on a public diagnosis in order to invalidate their candidacy or pres ency is a disastrous overreach of ablest medicalizing attitudes. Claims about the “men tal fitness” of the president do not seem to harm him personally or politically. The end re ult of the resistance to Trumpism has yet to come, but if it continues to pull mental health stigma to the forefront of its battle will only lead to further harm to mentally ill in dividuals within the United States.

Anti-psychiatry Anti-psychiatry, as the name implies, is a movement across multiple disciplines against the practices of psychiatry. In general, anti-psychiatrists cite ethical charges against the profession of psychiatry, which then often bleeds into metaphysical claims against the ex istence of mental disorder outside of obvious cognitive disability. Anti-psychiatric sens Bents evolved, in part, out of public outcry following the publicized discovery of “back Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World wards”—areas of mental asylums reserved for the most mentally disabled who were left within squalid conditions. One of the leading figures of the anti-psychiatry movement was the psychiatrist, Thomas Szasz, who argued that mental illness as conceived was a myth that perpetuated collectivist social control and infringed 18 upon human freedom. Szasz stresses the difference between more visibly physical dis eases of the brain such as cognitive impairment with mental disturbances which he de scribes instead as “counterfeit illnesses” which in his view only resemble physical dis eases in terms of unsound metaphors that do more damage than good. How ever, by accusing psychiatry as a whole as ideological propaganda and control, the antipsychiatrists formed their own ideological contrarianism (e.g. Szasz co-founded the Cis zens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) with the Church of Scientology in a combined effort against psychiatric practices). The anti-psychiatry movement has sown irreparable doubt that has only further alienated mental difference and worsened the social status of the seriously mentally ill. Thomas Szasz’s (p. 996) intent to show that psychiatry is not a “legitimate” medicine relies upon a strong yet unexamined notion of medicine qua Jedi cine. Delegitimizing psychiatry as an entire practice may have had the best intentions for some, but it nevertheless caused hermeneutical injustice toward the mentally ill in deny ing them access to self-knowledge through doubt. Szasz’s polemical works argue tireless ly against the infringed freedoms of the “so-called” mentally ill, but does not account for what patients should do in seeking help. Despite anti-psychiatric criticisms and conjec Cure, there is no collectivized epistemic monopoly or conspiracy of psychiatric control to be found; as intimated in the previous section, systems of oppression and control seem more the result of ignorance and poor resources than willful or diabolical maleficence. Psychiatry is not a collectivist, let alone unified practice, no matter what anti-psychic Wrists accuse it of being. Thomas Szasz’s depiction of psychiatry is that of a lurking shad ow conspiracy, further wedging the divide of distrust between society and medicine.

The relative success of the anti-psychiatry movement is clear today as psychiatry is still considered an entirely different field than medicine, implying and further reinforcing the 19 belief in a rigid dualism between mind and body. This success is also apparent within other social sciences, humanities, and popular press. The experience of being epistemic ally adrift that pervades in society due to psychiatric practices are not remedied, but compounded by anti-psychiatric attitudes. The cultural consciousness about mental ill Bess becomes easily confused due to the existence of many self-described experts who claim different causes and “cures” for mental disturbance from diets to hobbies. Ann Cvetkovich’s 2012 depression memoir/treatise entitled Depression: A Public Feeling, with out citing “traditional” anti-psychiatrists, presents a strong contemporary embodiment of these attitudes. Beyond her own personal concerns regarding the psychiatric profession, Cvetkovich additionally casts doubt upon other depressives’ experiences to the point of being “dissatisfied with more popular mainstream depression memoirs... all of which 20 largely, if ambivalently, endorse pharmaceutical treatment...” ( Cvetkovich 2012: 23). Her work rests rather uncritically on the claim that depression is a spiritual affliction, rather than a psycho-physiological one, that is rooted within and caused by capitalism and racial oppression (by way of her own white guilt). While this may betray Cvetkovich’s wards”—areas of mental asylums reserved for the most mentally disabled who were left within squalid conditions. One of the leading figures of the anti-psychiatry movement was the psychiatrist, Thomas Szasz, who argued that mental illness as conceived was a myth that perpetuated collectivist social control and infringed 18 upon human freedom. Szasz stresses the difference between more visibly physical dis eases of the brain such as cognitive impairment with mental disturbances which he de scribes instead as “counterfeit illnesses” which in his view only resemble physical dis eases in terms of unsound metaphors that do more damage than good. How ever, by accusing psychiatry as a whole as ideological propaganda and control, the antipsychiatrists formed their own ideological contrarianism (e.g. Szasz co-founded the Cis zens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) with the Church of Scientology in a combined effort against psychiatric practices). The anti-psychiatry movement has sown irreparable doubt that has only further alienated mental difference and worsened the social status of the seriously mentally ill. Thomas Szasz’s (p. 996) intent to show that psychiatry is not a “legitimate” medicine relies upon a strong yet unexamined notion of medicine qua Jedi cine. Delegitimizing psychiatry as an entire practice may have had the best intentions for some, but it nevertheless caused hermeneutical injustice toward the mentally ill in deny ing them access to self-knowledge through doubt. Szasz’s polemical works argue tireless ly against the infringed freedoms of the “so-called” mentally ill, but does not account for what patients should do in seeking help. Despite anti-psychiatric criticisms and conjec Cure, there is no collectivized epistemic monopoly or conspiracy of psychiatric control to be found; as intimated in the previous section, systems of oppression and control seem more the result of ignorance and poor resources than willful or diabolical maleficence. Psychiatry is not a collectivist, let alone unified practice, no matter what anti-psychic Wrists accuse it of being. Thomas Szasz’s depiction of psychiatry is that of a lurking shad ow conspiracy, further wedging the divide of distrust between society and medicine.

The relative success of the anti-psychiatry movement is clear today as psychiatry is still considered an entirely different field than medicine, implying and further reinforcing the 19 belief in a rigid dualism between mind and body. This success is also apparent within other social sciences, humanities, and popular press. The experience of being epistemic ally adrift that pervades in society due to psychiatric practices are not remedied, but compounded by anti-psychiatric attitudes. The cultural consciousness about mental ill Bess becomes easily confused due to the existence of many self-described experts who claim different causes and “cures” for mental disturbance from diets to hobbies. Ann Cvetkovich’s 2012 depression memoir/treatise entitled Depression: A Public Feeling, with out citing “traditional” anti-psychiatrists, presents a strong contemporary embodiment of these attitudes. Beyond her own personal concerns regarding the psychiatric profession, Cvetkovich additionally casts doubt upon other depressives’ experiences to the point of being “dissatisfied with more popular mainstream depression memoirs... all of which 20 largely, if ambivalently, endorse pharmaceutical treatment...” ( Cvetkovich 2012: 23). Her work rests rather uncritically on the claim that depression is a spiritual affliction, rather than a psycho-physiological one, that is rooted within and caused by capitalism and racial oppression (by way of her own white guilt). While this may betray Cvetkovich’s Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World own anti-intersubjective thinking in the sense of denying the possibility of depression be ing rooted in other existential causes, she does still represent a contentious anti-psych attic perspective about depression that presents itself as a typical epistemic authority. She inherits the overtly political posturings of the tradition concerned more readily with personal liberty than with the multiplicities of mental disorder.

Criminalized Today, due to the decline of state hospitals and the growth of mass incarceration and po lice brutality, the seriously mentally ill have no safe haven. Slate and Johnson argue that prisons have become the de fact mental health system in the United States (2008: 59– 61). (p. 997) Currently, the largest inpatient mental health facility in the country is the Cook County Jail in Chicago with one third of its population suffering from mental illness, while nationally at least 400,000 mentally ill individuals are prison inmates. This growth of “criminalized” mental illness has come about from the grand-scale deinsti tutionalization movements following from the Kennedy administration in 1963. In psychiatrist and historian Fuller Torres’s account, it is clear that anti-psychiatric attitudes along with America’s own obsession regarding personal freedoms led to deinstitutionalization while paradoxically throwing the mentally ill in jail by droves when they no longer had the Loci 21 teal recourse to better prevent criminal behavior. This came as well with the advent of the growth of mass incarceration and the overcrowded prison industrial complex, where poor and minority individuals have been imprisoned indefinitely for only minor initial crimes. With the decline of state mental hospitals, individu als with mental illness have no avenues for treatment, leading to a greater likelihood of 22 deviant behavior, putting them at risk of arrest or police brutality.

The industrial prison complex not only presents itself as a source of general anxiety for those under threat of incarceration, but its own machinations have created their own mental illness and social death for inmates. The implementation of solitary confinement has been proven to create its own distinctive mental disorder in inmates and has been deemed a method of torture and cruel and unusual punishment. The growing use of “spe Dial housing units” (SHU) in super-maximum prisons have created SHU syndrome, a unique condition that appears amongst solitary confinement prisoners that includes hy perresponsitivity to external stimuli, relatively idiosyncratic perceptual distortions, panic attacks, difficulty in concentration and memory, obsessional thoughts, and overt paranoia (Gunther 2013: 145). Solitary confinement, as it is a form of torture, creates mental ill Bess and anguish. One of the few windows into the active practice of solitary confinement that we have had in the United States is the case of Chelsea Manning, the Army whistle blower. Manning faced further punishment within prison for a suicide attempt that result ed from previous solitary confinement and presumably her experience of gender dyspho ria resulting from being kept in a male prison. She was found guilty of “conduct which threatens” for her suicide attempt “violating good behavior” and sentenced to an adj 23 tonal fourteen days of solitary confinement. The logic of the current Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World criminal justice system compounds the suffering of mental illness. Gunther argues that solitary confinement not only dehumanizes, but de animalizes inmates leading to them be coming completely unhinged through the process of becoming both legally and socially dead to the world. To be legally and socially dead is an abject erasure of the men tally ill individual’s lived experience.

(p. 998) With the erosion of state hospitals and the growth of the industrial prison com Alex as well as the advent of militarized police forces, seriously mentally ill cases are de fact handled by police and the criminal justice system. Even worse, is that the criminal justice system, both at the level of the police and even at the level of the courts, is ill-pre pared for considering mentally ill citizens’ existence amongst society ( Slate and Johnson 24 2008; Erickson and Erickson 2008). Where many mentally ill individuals disappear al most entirely from the public view within prisons, countless examples of mentally ill Hindi visuals brutalized and killed by police pervade the public consciousness. In 2006, the De Apartment of Justice estimated that persons with mental illness were four times as likely to be killed by police (Corner 2006, cited in Slate and Johnson 2008: 83). One especially jarring case from 2016 is that of Charles Kinsey, an African-American therapist shot by Of Nicer Jonathan Aledda in North Miami, Florida, while Kinsey was consoling one of his pa taints with severe autism who could not comply with the officer’s demands. The local po lice union tried to alleviate outrage by admitting that the officer was not aiming for Kin sey, who was pleading that the officer dissociative identity disorder not shoot, but the patient that Kinsey was try ing to protect. Further, police shot and killed a mentally ill man named Al red Olango in September 2016 in San Diego, California after his sister had called 911 in order to help him when he was having an episode. In October 2016, NYPD officers shot and killed Deborah Banner, a schizophrenic African-American woman in the Bronx, in her own home when her neighbors had once again reported her erratic behavior. The police had in the past been called to Banner’s apartment in order to aid her, but this time they entered, shot, and killed her as she defended herself with a baseball 25 bat from their intrusion. The examples of mentally ill citizens brutalized by police continue to grow, as “the risk of being killed during a police incident is 16 times greater for individuals with untreated mental illness than for other civilians approached or stopped by officers” ( Fuller et al. 2015: 1). If police are the first line of treatment for mentally ill individuals, then they ought to be better trained to deal with mentally ill citizens, let alone supplied with less destructive means toward duty and ser vice. The militarization of police only further ensures the destruction of seriously mental ly ill individuals who do not have the ability to easily comply with police orders. With mentally ill deviant behavior being a direct concern for police and the increased public awareness of police brutalities and shootings, the mentally ill face a concrete fear without relief. Where the interaction between (p. 999) a police officer and citizen in the United States contains the chance of deadly force, the citizen always has reason for anxiety, which can only exacerbate atypical behavior. criminal justice system compounds the suffering of mental illness. Gunther argues that solitary confinement not only dehumanizes, but de animalizes inmates leading to them be coming completely unhinged through the process of becoming both legally and socially dead to the world. To be legally and socially dead is an abject erasure of the men tally ill individual’s lived experience.

(p. 998) With the erosion of state hospitals and the growth of the industrial prison com Alex as well as the advent of militarized police forces, seriously mentally ill cases are de fact handled by police and the criminal justice system. Even worse, is that the criminal justice system, both at the level of the police and even at the level of the courts, is ill-pre pared for considering mentally ill citizens’ existence amongst society ( Slate and Johnson 24 2008; Erickson and Erickson 2008). Where many mentally ill individuals disappear al most entirely from the public view within prisons, countless examples of mentally ill Hindi visuals brutalized and killed by police pervade the public consciousness. In 2006, the De Apartment of Justice estimated that persons with mental illness were four times as likely to be killed by police (Corner 2006, cited in Slate and Johnson 2008: 83). One especially jarring case from 2016 is that of Charles Kinsey, an African-American therapist shot by Of Nicer Jonathan Aledda in North Miami, Florida, while Kinsey was consoling one of his pa taints with severe autism who could not comply with the officer’s demands. The local po lice union tried to alleviate outrage by admitting that the officer was not aiming for Kin sey, who was pleading that the officer dissociative identity disorder not shoot, but the patient that Kinsey was try ing to protect. Further, police shot and killed a mentally ill man named Al red Olango in September 2016 in San Diego, California after his sister had called 911 in order to help him when he was having an episode. In October 2016, NYPD officers shot and killed Deborah Banner, a schizophrenic African-American woman in the Bronx, in her own home when her neighbors had once again reported her erratic behavior. The police had in the past been called to Banner’s apartment in order to aid her, but this time they entered, shot, and killed her as she defended herself with a baseball 25 bat from their intrusion. The examples of mentally ill citizens brutalized by police continue to grow, as “the risk of being killed during a police incident is 16 times greater for individuals with untreated mental illness than for other civilians approached or stopped by officers” ( Fuller et al. 2015: 1). If police are the first line of treatment for mentally ill individuals, then they ought to be better trained to deal with mentally ill citizens, let alone supplied with less destructive means toward duty and ser vice. The militarization of police only further ensures the destruction of seriously mental ly ill individuals who do not have the ability to easily comply with police orders. With mentally ill deviant behavior being a direct concern for police and the increased public awareness of police brutalities and shootings, the mentally ill face a concrete fear without relief. Where the interaction between (p. 999) a police officer and citizen in the United States contains the chance of deadly force, the citizen always has reason for anxiety, which can only exacerbate atypical behavior.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World # The Need for Open Lived Experiences and Phe # nomenological Psychopathology In some closing remarks, I want to comment on the notion of normalcy. Perhaps prescient in the mock group therapy game I mentioned above, the most antagonistic and outspoken 26 “character” was a classmate who had been assigned to play “normal.” This peer spent the entire session insecurely berating everyone around him, goading others in calling 27 them all crazy and unstable. In a life-world that pre-exists categorization and diagnostic criteria that are only designed to recognize that which is other or abnormal, what exactly is a mentally healthy individual in opposition to mental illness? It is crucial to note that the World Health Organization’s definition of mental health is not that of mental “normal cy” or neurotypicality but instead “is defined as a state of well-being in which every Hindi visual realizes his or her own potential, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and is able to make a contribution to her or his commune ty”. This definition does not exclude ability for those who have mental illnesses or disorders to still nevertheless live within a relative state of mental health. That is, mental health is a condition of flourishing that is not precluded by having a different non-“normal” condition. What prevents those with mental disorders from being able to live flourishing lives of mental health is not necessarily the illness or condition, but the stigma and perpetuation of ignorance in society. Being epistemically adrift in a confusing and stigmatized society is more opposed to mental health than men tal disorders are. The answer in the face of being epistemically adrift, I believe, is the virtue of defiance in the context of mental health settings as argued by Nancy Nyquist Potter (2016 ). Potter claims that in order to live a flourishing life, patients find them selves having to navigate being noncompliant with procedures and stigmatizing society. Being mentally ill in an epistemically adrift society requires self-advocating resistance in order to live well.

If we continue to consider mental illness as a bad and immoral thing, then neurotypical individuals are in an insecure and fragile position. Considering conditions such as posttraumatic stress disorder (post-traumatic stress disorder) that arise out of a person’s experience or environment, mental illness can develop and affect anyone at any time. Jasper argues that ultimately, being mentally healthy is merely what appears along the majority or average while illness is that which is the minority or deviant (Jasper 1959/1963: 779–780). Ultimately, normal cy is only possible to understand as the absence of deviance. Our understanding of men tal illness is at bottom understood by its difference from the majority. But at no point can we confuse our disciplines as self-sufficient. Jasper again states that “No outline of a hu man being as a whole ever quite succeeds... Every time we grasp at the whole it recedes and we are left with only a particular schema of the whole, one mode of com Alex unity among others” (1959/1963: 751). At best, different disciplinary attitudes can sketch out a partial understanding of human phenomena, but they cannot develop a full and lasting picture of human experience. To quote Bernard Waldenfels, “for both the cul Aural and intercultural realms: there are orders, but there is no one order ” (2006/2011: Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World 82. Original emphasis). Each discipline provides a perspective of the world of mental phe novena, but we cannot reduce the phenomena to any one approach.

Without taking a serious phenomenological approach to mental illness—without a clear and open discussion which allows patients to share their experience of mental illness and to be treated with epistemically just practices—there is no hope for the mentally ill to find meaning in their condition. Conflicting narratives distract us from being able to get back “to the things themselves” regarding mental illness, and have allowed for horrendous criminal policies to appear instead of helpful treatment programs. Otherwise, “[m]early fact-minded sciences make for merely fact-minded people” ( Husserl 1954/1970: 6). Husserl argues that one can find individual meaning through the life-world itself, but a mentally ill individual who tries to make sense of their condition can easily find them selves epistemically adrift with no clear direction for life projects. Perhaps what we see in the United States today is a worst of both worlds scenario between psychiatric and antipsychiatric models of mental health; the neurodivergent are both highly categorized and controlled by disciplinary methods, but they also face a societal doubt that mental illness is a real phenomenon that is unchosen. Society’s attitudes, informed and misinformed by different disciplinary approaches, present mental illness as something other; mental ill Bess is seen as a phenomenon that must always be kept at arm’s length, ostracized, and condemned. The effect of this alienates the mentally ill even more than the conditions themselves. A society’s widespread fear and discomfort with abnormality condemns and silences its abnormal inhabitants.

Ferguson P. M.. “Creating the Back Ward: The Triumph of Custodialism and the Uses of Therapeutic Failure in Nineteenth-Century Idiot Asylums.” In L. Ben-Mosh, C. Chapman, and before Christ Carey (eating disorders.), Disability Incarcerated: Imprisonment and Disability in the United States and Canada, pp. 45–62. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Ford M.. “America’s Largest Mental Hospital Is a Jail.” The Atlantic. June 8. Ac Fessed September 28, 2016. Americas-largest-mental-hospital-is-a-jail/395012/ Foucault M.. Madness & Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, trans. R. Howard. New York: Random House.

Frances A. J.. “Trump Isn’t Crazy.” Psychology Today. January 31. Accessed Febru ary 4, 2017.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World Pricker M.. Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Fuller D. A., Lamb L., Biasotti M., and Nook J.. “Overlooked in the Undercounted: The Role of Mental Illness in Fatal Law Enforcement Encounters.” Treatment Advocacy Center. Office of Research and Public Affairs. December. Accessed October 22, 2016.

Gilman S. L. and Thomas J. M.. Are Racists Crazy? How Prejudice, Racism, and An tisemitism Became Markers of Insanity. New York: New York University Press.

Lied S. and Frank R. G.. “Mental Illness and Violence: Lessons from the Evi Fence.” American Journal of Public Health 104: e5–e6.

Gunther L.. Solitary Confinement: Social Death and its Afterlives. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Helm A. B.. “North Miami Police Officer Who Shot Therapist Identified; Sister of Autistic Man Gives Heartbreaking Statement.” The Root. July 23. Accessed September 27, 2016. Bent/ Husserl E. (1954/1970). The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, trans. D. Carr. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Husserl E.. Formal and Transcendental Logic, trans. D. Cairns. The Hague: March nus Nijhoff.

Jasper K. (1959/1963). General Psychopathology: Volume I, trans. J. Hoeing and M. W. Hamilton. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Jasper K. (1959/1963). General Psychopathology: Volume second, trans. J. Hoeing and M. W. Hamilton. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Johnson K, Desmarais S. L., Grimm K. J., Mueller S. J., Swartz M. S., and Van Born R. A.. “Proximal Risk Factors for Short-Term Community Violence Among Adults with Mental Illnesses.” Psychiatric Services 67: 771–778.

Lasalvia A., Pena E., Sartorius N., and Henderson S.. “Should the Label ‘Schizo phrenia’ be Abandoned?” Schizophrenia Research 162: 276–284.

Lenard N.. “The Military Logic of Punishing Chelsea Manning’s Suicide Attempt.” The Nation. September 28. Accessed October 16, 2016. tile/the-military-logic-of-punishing-Chelsea-manning-suicide-attempt/ Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World Lieu T.. “Twitter Post.” 11: AM EST, February 4. status/827916850973380608 Martinelli L. R., Kinney J. S., and Kaye R.. “Separating Myth from Fact: Unblinking Mental Illness and Violence and Implications for Gun Control Legislation and Public Poi cy.” New England Journal on Crime and Civil Confinement 40: 359–378.

Metal J. M.. The Protest Psychosis: How Schizophrenia Became a Black Disease. Boston: Beacon Press.

Olson M.. “Building the Mental Health Workforce Capacity Needed to Treat Adults with Serious Mental Illnesses.” Health Affairs 35: 983–990.

Oquendo M. A.. “The Goldwater Rule: Why Breaking it is Unethical and Irresponsi ble.” American Psychiatric Association. August 3. Accessed September 27, 2016. https:// Paras J. and Sass L. A.. “Varieties of ‘Phenomenology’: On Description, Under standing, and Explanation in Psychiatry.” In K. S. Kendler and J. Paras (eating disorders.), Philosophy cal Issues in Psychiatry, pp. 239–278. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Potter N. N.. The Virtue of Defiance and Psychiatric Engagement. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Rembis M.. “The New Asylums: Madness and Mass Incarceration in the Neoliberal Era.” In L. Ben-Mosche, C. Chapman, and before Christ Carey (eating disorders.), Disability Incarcerated: Im prisonment and Disability in the United States and Canada, pp. 139–159. New York: Pal grave Macmillan.

Saddler J. Z.. Values and Psychiatric Diagnosis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Slack K. and Blinder A.. “Dylan Roof Himself Rejects best Defense against Exec son.” The New York Times. January 1. Accessed February 4, 2017. https:// Slate R. and Wesley Johnson W.. Criminalization of Mental Illness: Crisis and Op portunity for the Justice System. Durham: Carolina Academic Press.

Solomon M. 2017. “On the Appearance and Disappearance of Asperger’s Syndrome.” In K. S. Kendler and J. Paras (eating disorders.), Philosophical Issues in Psychiatry fourth, pp. 176–186. Ox ford: Oxford University Press.

Szasz T.. The Myth of Mental Illness: Foundations of a Theory of Personal Conduct. Revised Edition. New York: Harper & Row Publishers.

Thomas J. M. and Carson Byrd W.. “THE ‘SICK’ RACIST: Racism and Psy chopathology in the Colorblind Era.” Du Lois Review 13: 181–203.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World Torres E. F.. American Psychosis: How the Federal Government Destroyed the Mental Illness Treatment System. New York: Oxford University Press.

Waldenfels B. (2006/2011). Phenomenology of the Alien, trans. A. Kozin and T. Stäher. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Weiss E. L., Gross G. D., and Moncrief D.. “Can Health Care Reform End Stigma toward Mental Illness?” Journal of Progressive Human Services 27: 95–110.

World Health Organization (WHO).. “Mental Health: A State of Well Being.” World Health Organization. August. Accessed February 5, 2017. factfiles/mental_health/en/ Notes: 1 ( ) I use this term ironically, in the sense that discussions of crises in philosophy and oth er disciplines have been long cliché, even doubted in the beginning pages of Husserl’s own Crisis text (Husserl, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenom nology 1954/1970). As I will cover in this article, the social crisis of mental illness is per petal: both long-standing and constantly seen as an immediate threat requiring an even more immediate resolution.

2 ( ) Three significant approaches to mental illness that I will not discuss are that of Deli ion, psychoanalysis, and fiction, while each most certainly capture our cultural imagine son with extremely complicated narratives. Religious narratives still cast mental illness as a sort of possession or spiritual battle. Such a viewpoint may have its merits, but often the connotation is that those with mental disorders have done something to deserve their suffering, which is a cruel practice. Psychoanalysis, while no longer as widespread in the academy as it was, still influences many public notions of mental health and disorder. Fic son, in any form, often presents the mentally ill in many negative ways often using indie tint depictions of madness as either comic relief, a force of evil, or a convenient plot twist.

3 ( ) In discussing the sciences, Husserl uses the word Wissenschaften which more widely applies not just to the natural sciences but to all disciplines in general. In this article I will discuss different “disciplinary” attitudes, but in a Husserlian sense, I could just as readily be using the word sciences.

4 ( ) It is further important to note that when faced with the option to claim an “insanity de Dense” in order to seek leniency in his sentencing, Roof denied psychiatric evaluation. A handwritten manifesto found in his car reads “Also I want state [ sic] that I am morally op posed to psychology. It is a Jewish invention, and does nothing but invent diseases and tell people they have problems when they Cont [ sic]”. Roof’s refusal to be evaluated means that we cannot speculate on his mental state. In stead, we should directly evaluate his actions for the non-psychpathologizing answer; it Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World was a racist and misogynist hate crime perpetrated out of Roof’s premeditated ideology cal and violent plans.

5 ( ) See Johnson et al. (2016 ) which discusses how mentally ill individuals are victims of vi olence at a higher rate than the general population. Additionally, see Fuller et al.; Lied and Frank; and Martinelli, Kinney, and Kaye for discussions on how mental illness is not statistically a factor in violent crimes. Further, if mental disorder alone were the operative factor of violent behavior, the prevalence of mental disorders would lead to a higher rate of mass violence.

6 ( ) There have additionally been attempts, both within psychiatric practices and from oth er disciplines, to pathologize racism as a mental illness or a symptom of mental illness. According to Thomas and Byrd (2016 ), such an attempt confuses widespread social prob ems with individual psychoanalysis and defers social responsibility against systemic racism. A fuller history of mental illness first being used as a way of explaining race and racism can be found in Gilman and Thomas’s 2016 Are Racists Crazy? How Prejudice, Racism, and Antisemitism Became Markers of Insanity. This work studies how psychiatry of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries began with a justification of racist systems, on ly to change later to blaming racist behavior and ideology on mental illness when social attitudes had changed.

7 ( ) There is a live debate as to whether mental illness can truly be considered an illness, or disorder, or mere diversity across mental types. I will use mental illness and mental disorder interchangeably.

8 ( ) For those who are epistemically adrift, I would argue along the lines of Nancy Nyquist Potter, to say that being defiant/noncompliant in the face of stigmatizing practices is an ethical virtue in order to succeed in living a flourishing life.

9 ( ) This game additionally showed that mental disorders were perhaps merely a joke or a spectacle.

10 ( ) A better description of the processes and motivations that go into the DSM’s Korma son can be found in Cooper and Potter.

11 ( ) I am thankful to Matthew Brooke for suggesting this point.

12 ( ) “Back to the things themselves” ( zu Sateen selbst ) is one of Husserl’s better-known catchphrases, arguing that our best understanding of the world must come from a direct engagement with phenomena as they appear.

13 ( ) While the DSM has moved away from the psychoanalytic perspective that was in the DSM-second, this history of pathologizing protest still remains in cultural consciousness. Again, see Gilman and Thomas.

14 ( ) I am thankful to Miriam Solomon for sharing an early draft of this chapter.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World 15 ( ) There are many reasons that one could object to Donald Trump’s legitimacy as the President of the United States, let alone his candidacy to begin with, but none of these reasons (corruption, racism, complete disregard for the rule of law/constitution, etc.) are at bottom dependent upon his own psyche. I hold that a politician’s mental health is irrel Levant to their (in)eligibility to rule.

16 ( ) Replies can be found listed under initial tweet: 827916850973380608 17 ( ) The same sort of unsettling policy has appeared in the gun control debate where politicians have argued for restricting not the sale of high-powered firearms at large, but preventing those with a history of mental illness from purchasing weapons. Such a pre Tentative measure would require an invasively public database of individuals with mental disorder, furthering stigma and anguish while not likely curbing gun deaths in the United States.

18 ( ) There are of course many other anti-psychiatrist thinkers, but I find Szasz to have had a relatively successful afterlife in US policy and understandings of mental illness. Some lump Michel Foucault in as an anti-psychiatrist, however I find that this label to be inc curate. Foucault’s work on mental illness is mainly a critique of the development of con cents, and does not make any definitive claim regarding the existence of phenomena be hind these epistemic concepts.

19 ( ) I am thankful to Polo Fusar-Poi for suggesting this point in manuscript comments.

20 ( ) Cvetkovich does not state her reasons for distrusting anyone’s recovery or relief through medication, but one can assume it has more readily to do with the pharmaceutic cal industry being a capitalist industry more than it has to do with medications’ efficacy.

21 ( ) Torres (2014 ) provides a rather full historical analysis of deinstitutionalization include ing its motivations and aftermath, which we are still seeing today.

22 ( ) Again I want to point out Potter’s (2016 ) argument for defiance as an epistemic and moral virtue in the face of conflicting motivations and interpretations of mental illness. While I agree with her that there must be an appropriate mean of defiance in the face of these mental health attitudes that I have discussed, the present threat of police and state violence makes for a harder case regarding judgment.

23 ( ) Manning has since had her original sentence commuted by President Obama thanks to activists and large-scale petitions condemning her treatment and torture within soil Cary confinement. She was released in May 2017.

24 ( ) Where Slate and Johnson write on a wide array of mental health problems in the United States with hopeful and optimistic advice on where to turn, Erickson and Er Dickson (2008 ) describe the criminal justice system’s utter inability to understand respond sibility in the face of behavioral sciences and the so-called insanity defense. Erickson and Erickson show that incompetency to stand trial is a well-intentioned legal precedent that Phenomenological Psychopathology and America’s Social Life-World is both abused by defense lawyers and poorly understood by juries and judges alike, lead ing instead to a higher conviction rate for the mentally ill.

25 ( ) More tragically, Banner had written an implicitly phenomenological account of her life with schizophrenia years before her fatal altercation with police. In this short essay she condemns the police for their poor training and practice with the severely ill and cites other instances of brutality. Banner’s essay shows that her schizophrenia was not as bad as the stigma that she had faced for the condition which made her worry for her life and wellbeing. Of course, race is a crucial factor in all three of these cases on top of mental disability. Any practical changes in combating mental illness stigma must al so go hand in hand with anti-racist work in order to be fully effective in curbing socially manufactured anguish.

26 ( ) I am personally hesitant to use the word normal in the context of mental health due to its stigmatizing implications, but this is what his card stated.

27 ( ) I remarked after the game was over that if this peer accurately represented “normal cy,” our society is doomed.

Jake Jackson Department of Philosophy, Temple University Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians Giovanni Stanghellini The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Sep 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter argues that psychopathology should be at the heart of psychiatry and Blini cal psychology. It first considers the three most important unmet needs identified by rehi dents in psychiatry, namely: time dedicated to supervision, time dedicated to studying psychopathology, and opportunities to discuss patients’ psychopathological phenomena in clinical practice. It then examines five reasons for teaching phenomenological psy chopathology to clinicians, along with its agenda—generalized and individual knowledge, explaining and understanding, firsthand second-order empathy, education, and formation. The chapter concludes by emphasizing the need for training institutions to finally recon Size the importance of the influence of the teacher upon the process of professional for mason—which means that it is not only the trainees who need to be trained, selected, and supervised, but also the trainers.

Keywords: psychiatry, clinical psychology, supervision, clinicians, phenomenological psychopathology, knowledge, empathy, education, training, professional formation # Introduction EDUCATION in mental health care is a long way from emphasizing adequate concepts and methods for exploring the patient’s perspective. Since the publication of diagnostic manuals, many clinicians have confused operationalized criteria with handbooks of psy chiatry and psychopathology, and diagnostic criteria with the whole picture of the illness es. Consequently, a magnificent thesaurus of psychopathological knowledge, including indepth descriptions of mental abnormal phenomena and syndromes, has simply been re moved from educational programs. Moreover, educational programs make very little ef fort to bring to the fore the methodological problems that arise during the clinical inter view, that is, how to get to know “what it is like” to experience a given symptom or abhor mal phenomenon and why taking the other’s perspective is relevant for clinical practice. The interview is not merely a clinical problem; rather, it may be considered an epistemo Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians logical and ethical one. There is a need for a philosophically rich approach to the art of in terviewing, especially for the task of exploring the patient’s subjectivity. The risk is that mental health care as a discipline may lose its own identity if a rigorous assessment and attentive care to the patient’s subjectivity is disregarded.

The need to go “back to fundamentals” has recently been argued for. In this chapter I argue that psychopathology, as the disc line that assesses and makes sense of abnormal human subjectivity, should be at the heart of psychiatry and clinical psychology. It should be a basic educational prerequisite in the curriculum for mental health professionals and a key element of the shared intel lectual identity of clinicians and researchers in this field. Yet how can young clinicians, who are so hungry for textbook knowledge, structured interviews, decision-mak ing criteria, and therapeutic protocols be so patient as to endorse a kind of knowledge which is stubbornly aware of its limits, and resists all sorts of objectification and dogma ism? How can those who are looking for expert knowledge be satisfied with a kind of knowledge which conceives of itself as an “unlimited task” which takes place in the facet-face, here-and-now encounter between two persons? How can they be happy with a mentor whose main teaching can be condensed into one sentence: “questions are more essential than answers, and every answer becomes a new question”?

Trainees’ Unmet Needs in Learning Psy # chopathology Given all that, it comes as a surprise that trainees and early career psychiatrists consider rediscovering psychopathology as one of the top priorities for their own future and for that of their patients. According to the Charter on Training of Med cal Specialists in the EU: Requirements for the Specialty of Psychiatry, ed ucational programs during psychiatric residency should include structured training (with lectures, seminars, etc.) on psychopathology and other disciplines, which are held by stu dents to represent the scientific bases of psychiatry (similar principles are reflected in the recommendation for undergraduate training; see Box 91.1).

Many studies (Lodz-Rambaldi et al. 2008; Oakley and Mali 2010; Muijen 2010; Rojnic Guzman et al. 2012a, b; Guzman et al. 2012 ) on the application of the UEMS recommend Cations in the different European countries showed great variability, in particular as re Bards training in psychopathology. The results of a survey exploring the current status of training on psychopathology in Europe to which forty-one represent Datives of early career psychiatrists of their national associations were invited to partici pate were the following: - all respondents recognized psychopathology as a core component of training in psy chiatry; Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians formal training course in psychopathology is available in twenty-nine out of the Whir ty-two surveyed countries and in most countries there is not a defined number of hours dedicated to psychopathology; - teaching is mainly theoretical (96%) and discussion of clinical cases is routinely per formed only in 24% of nations; - structured training on psychometric tools is available in only ten countries (35%), and respondents from nineteen countries (73%) reported they used them routinely in Blini cal practice, even without formal training; - trainees consider that the primary aims of studying psychopathology are (a) to assess psychiatric symptoms (47%), (b) to understand patients’ abnormal experiences (33%), and (c) to make nosographical diagnosis (20%); - the most frequently adopted psychopathological approach is the clinical one (65%) aimed at nosgraphical diagnosis, while the phenomenological approach is adopt ed in 22% of the countries and the descriptive approach in 18% of countries; - Karl Jasper, Emil Kraepelin, and Kurt Schneider are listed as the most influential psychopathologists, followed by Eugene Bleuler, Sigmund Freud, and Philippe Panel; - at the end of residency, 48% of respondents are not satisfied with the training they received in psychopathology, 21% believe that psychopathology “is not useful in Blini cal practice,” 25% that it “is old-fashioned,” and 50% that it “is of no interest for psy chiatric practice.” Six percent of respondents state that they have “no time to dedicate to the study of psychopathology”; - the most important unmet needs identified by residents in psychiatry are time Jedi acted to supervision (90%), time dedicated to studying psychopathology (73%), and op portunities to discuss patients’ psychopathological phenomena in clinical practice (57%). Other unmet needs include lack of supervision, which is available in only eleven of the surveyed countries (35%), and lack of training in the use of psychometric tools scales, which should be a compulsory part of residency courses, according to 100% of respondents.

Box 91. Undergraduate teaching and training in psychiatry, core curriculum and assessment Recommendations of the WPA co-sponsored meeting Coventry March 18 and 19, 2013 The main recommendations from the meeting were: 1. Core curriculum and assessment guidelines and procedures need ongoing re views especially in low income and developing countries.

2. When developing local policy for core curriculum and assessment guidelines, due consideration should be given to the different learning domains of knoll Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians edge, skills, and attitudes. Curriculum guidelines should include assessment procedures.

3. Course evaluation should be incorporated and made an integral component of formal teaching and of clinical placements.

The participants of the meeting proposed the following guiding principles for a core curriculum for undergraduate psychiatry to medical students. It is anticipated that adoption of these recommendations in different countries should ensure adherence to educational principles and promote high standards of mental health practice tak ing into account local contexts. (We use assessments to mean examination of what the students have learned and evaluation to examine if the teaching has delivered what it was supposed to do.)

Curriculum Knowledge By the end of medical school (or a locally specified time period) medical students should be able to: 1. Recognize common forms of psychopathology as well as the epidemiology, clinical manifestations, natural course, and response to treatment of common psychiatric disorders.

2. Familiarize themselves with common forms of pharmacological, psychothera pectic, and psychosocial interventions and the evidence for these interventions.

3. Recognize local mental health problems including those related to natural disasters. war, migration, and indigenous populations.

4. Identify mental health promotion opportunities and interventions in the path ways to psychiatric care.

5. Highlight the impact of mental illness on the health economy and society and recognize the need for the inclusion of mental health promotion and treatment in public health policies.

6. Describe ethical, legal, and cultural influences/values on patient manage Bent.

Skills

1. Establish rapport with patients included those who have mental health prob ems and/or are acutely distressed and with their families as needed.

2. Take a full psychiatric history and assess the mental state (including a cogni Dive assessment).

Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians 3. Demonstrate clinical reasoning and present a diagnostic formulation (which includes being able to describe symptoms and mental state features, etiological factors, differential diagnoses, a plan of management and assessment of Frog noses, and clinical ethical reasoning), which takes into account the biopsychoso Dial factors based on patients’ wishes and best available evidence relevant to the local context.

4. Identify and apply those interventions for mental health promotion and com mon psychiatric conditions that can be provided by non-mental health special sits.

5. Recognize what constitutes a psychiatric emergency and when a referral is warranted and to whom.

Attitude

1. Evaluate societal attitudes toward mental illness and the values attached to mental health and illness.

2. Reflect on their own attitude to mental illness and their personal values and the impact these might have on the clinical care provided to patients.

3. Demonstrate compassion, empathy, dignity, and respect for patients and take into account the principles of autonomy, confidentiality, capacity, and consent as they relate to the local context.

4. Recognize the importance of developing professional relationships based on ethical standards, transparency, and probity.

Assessment Psychiatry should be an important component of the examination process. Assess Bent could include the following components: 1. Attendance, participation, and successful completion of requirements of Olin cal placement as described in the local curriculum.

2. Clinical log books and/or cards that demonstrate evidence of clinical and re Elective practice.

3. An observed assessment of their interviewing skills and ability to detect com mon psychiatric conditions (through a structured clinical exam or in a clinic).

4. Written exams to test clinical and theoretical psychiatric knowledge using MCQs, essays, patient management problems, or other written assessments techniques as per local needs and resources.

5. Viva or case-based discussion.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians # Five Reasons for Teaching Phenomenology # cal Psychopathology The results of this survey demonstrate that the rediscovery of psychopathology is among the top priorities for training. Early career clinicians are not satisfied with the training they receive in psychopathology. They would like to see better educational opportunities in this field, requesting that theoretical knowledge be complemented by practical clinical skills. Yet famous recent editorials argue for the opposite, that is, psychiatry training should be heavily focused on neuroscience. In this sec son I will explain why I disagree with them.

For past generations of residents in psychiatry, Jasper’s General Psy chopathology was recommended reading. Familiarity with that and other classics of psy chopathology helped residents to see the DSMs as synopses of available knowledge and diagnostic algorithms to be used for clinical purposes—not as handbooks of psychiatry and psychopathology. This may not be the case for current residents, which may result in a high risk of misunderstanding and oversimplification. The main misunderstanding is, perhaps, that psychopathology is the name of an old-fashioned quasi-religious cult Pele rating the dogma that psychiatry should be part of the medical humanities rather than a biomedical science. Actually, psychopathology brings into focus the primary—although not sole—“object” of psychiatry: the psyche, that is, the patient’s abnormal experiences lived in the first-person perspective, embedded in anomalous forms of existence, and structured according to unusual meaning patterns. Psychopathology is a discourse ( logos ) about the sufferings ( pathos ) of the mind ( psyche ).

There are at least five reasons for psychopathology, and more exactly phenomenological psychopathology, to become once more a fundamental column of training in the field of mental health: - Phenomenological psychopathology provides clinicians with a method enabling them to capture the subtle nuances of patients’ experience that constitute the essentials of the “psychiatric object”. The precise characterization of these nuances is, at present, the only secure basis for diagnosis and treatment, since experiential symptoms are by far more specific diagnostic indexes than any other kind of sump toms, including behavioral ones.

Phenomenological psychopathology acknowledges that what patients manifest is not a series of mutually independent, isolated symptoms, but rather a certain structure of interwoven experiences, beliefs, and actions, all permeated by biographical details.

What stands in front of the clinician is not an amorphous agglomerate of symptoms, but a person with a specific, meaningful, and (to a certain extent) coherent “form of life.” - Phenomenological psychopathology is a method for understanding a given phenom non, that is, grasping the personal feel and meaning of an experience or set of expert Fences. Mental symptoms do not simply have subpersonal causes, but also a personal Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians feel and meaning. Understanding is not the effect of a generalized knowledge, but is achieved by immersing ourselves in a particular situation. Thus, phenomenological psychopathology preserves the individuality and uniqueness of the suffering person. It can operate in parallel with a traditional biomedical approach, since it does not exclude seeing abnormal phenomena as symptoms caused by a dysfunction to be treated, but additionally includes the exploration of personal meanings. Phenomena logical psychopathology conceptualizes mental symptoms as the outcome of a media son between the person and her abnormal phenomena.

Phenomenological psychopathology helps us not only to understand, but also to causally explain (“to explain” means sire per causes ) a given abnormal phenomenon, or a set of abnormal phenomena, since it helps to characterize them. Any phenomenon, in order to be explained, must first of all be described in the greatest detail. Thus phe nomenological psychopathology is a necessary prerequisite for linking clinical sciences to the neuroscience.

The fifth reason is that the personal background, as a pre-reflective context of mean ing and significance within which and against which persons construe the significance of their abnormal phenomena, should be part and parcel of a thorough clinical assess Bent. Thinness of phenotype and simplification of clinical constructs are the copse quinces of a mainstream approach to psychopathological phenotype that focuses on easy-to-assess operationalizable symptoms. Phenomenological investigations of abhor mal human subjectivity suggest a shift of attention from mere symptoms (i.e. state-like indexes for nosographical diagnosis) to a broader range of phenomena that are traitlike features of a given life-world. Systematic explorations of anomalies in the patients’ experience, for example, of time, space, body, self, and otherness, may provide a useful integration to the symptom-based approach. These abnormal phenomena can be used as pointers to the fundamental alterations of the structure of subjectivity characterize ing each mental disorder.

Psychopathology’s Agenda Psychopathology is a peculiar kind of discipline characterized by an “and-and” agenda bringing together generalized and individual knowledge, explaining and understanding, spontaneous and second-order empathy, technical education and human formation. All this should be acknowledged in establishing training curricula for clinicians.

Generalized and Individual Knowledge While acknowledging the need for systematic knowledge, psychopathology also advocates the necessity for clinicians not to forget that each patient is an individual and not just the token of a given category. We expect generalized knowledge in science—and psy chopathology is a science—but we also have to know that anything really meaningful tends to have a concrete form, and generalization destroys it. Jasper’s Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians General Psychopathology was the first systematic attempt to classify abnormal mental phenomena and became the most secure basis to establish a valid and reliable diagnosis. But Jasper suggested that the knowledge thus established must not be used as the map of a continent but more like as an outline of possible ways to explore it (ibid.). Jasper declared that the clinician’s main preoccupation, next to taxonomy, should be methodology. Methodology, next to taxonomy, is the only way to avoid depersonalization and dehumanization of the “real” patient. What we need, next to systematic and general zed knowledge, is the systematic awareness of the ways to gain knowledge about an Hindi visual patient.

A reliable taxonomy dissociative identity disorder some good in psychiatry. We can remember the whimsical and idiosyncratic ways psychiatric diagnoses were given—or rejected, by the so-called antipsychiatrists—in the 1970s and early 1980s. DSM and ICD, as well as structured and se mi-structured interviews, contributed to changing this profoundly unscientific attitude to ward systematic assessment and diagnosing. The technical biomedical turn of psychiatry in the 1970s was a reaction against this irrational attitude. To the technical approach, the scientific status of psychiatry is founded on reliable diagnosis. This is the right use of di agnostic manuals. Next to this, however, there is abuse of diagnostic manuals: the reifica son of diagnostic criteria. Diagnostic criteria are meant to index rather than thoroughly describe syndromes. We should not confuse our DSM diagnostic criteria with the Visor Hers that they were designed to index. This is a conceptual error since di agnostic criteria are representations and not objects in se. Also, they are abstractions since mental disorders are not natural entities existing in themselves.

The effectiveness of the diagnostic process relies on two domains: diagnostic criteria and the interview method. Operational diagnostic criteria are instrumental in achieving high reliability in the domain of the diagnostic schema, primarily because of their reduction of criterion variance. Structured interview methods help to improve the reliability of jag Gnostic assignment by reducing information variance. These two domains are coupled in such a way that structured interviews are designed to explore only those symptoms that are relevant to establishing a diagnosis according to the diagnostic criteria themselves. The main goal is to discover whether a patient with a given set of signs/symptoms “meets criteria.” Accordingly, interviewing is seen as a technique that should conform to the technical–rational paradigm of natural sciences in which psychiatry as a branch of bio medicine is positioned and the clinical encounter is thus conceived as a stimulus–re spouse pattern.

Psychopathology teaches us to balance this attitude with attention to the individuality of the patient. To encourage true dialogue between interviewer and interviewee the inter viewer should not presume to “know” a prior what is relevant to assess, and to possess the “whole picture” of the patient’s illness, whilst the patient has just the “pieces” of the puzzle. “It is much more important to know what sort of a patient has a disease than what sort of a disease a patient has.” This aphorism, attributed to Sir William Ogler (one of the founders of modern medicine in the early twentieth century) reflects the im Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians portance of oscillating between generalized and individual knowledge when interviewing a patient.

Explaining and Understanding As the science of human abnormal subjectivity, psychopathology brings into a clear epees temic focus the fact that mental health practice is based on two main, complementary methodological approaches: explaining and understanding. We causally explain a phe nomenon when we find, by repeated experience, that that kind of phenomenon is regular ly linked together with a number of other phenomena. Explanations are achieved by observation of events, by experiment and the collection of numerous examples which allow us to formulate general rules. This is the way we establish diagnostic categories and causal connections with subpersonal causes. Understanding, on the other hand, is achieved by immersing ourselves in a singular situation. It is not the effect of a generalized knowledge, rather fresh, personal intuition is needed on every occasion. An essential aspect of understanding is that it connects elements of the patient’s conscious life and, by doing so, it makes visible to the clinician something that helps him to feel what it is like to be in the patient’s mental state.

The attention to understanding other individuals is an essential virtue in the field of men tal health care. Philosopher Martha Nussbaum provides an unintention al portrait of the mental health clinician as a candidate prototype of a globally minded cit zen. The ideal citizen should have “the ability to think what it might be like to be in the shoes of a person different from oneself, to be an intelligent reader of that person’s story; and to understand the emotions and wishes and desires that someone so placed might have” ( Nussbaum 2010: 95–96). Also, she should possess the ability to have concern for the lives of others, to imagine a variety of complex issues affecting the story of a human life as it unfolds, and to understand human stories not just as aggregate data. This epitome should be able to see other persons, especially marginalized people, as fellows with equal rights and look at them with respect.

Firsthand Second-Order Empathy Nussbaum’s kind of understanding is, first and foremost, an ethical attitude that enables a person to put herself in someone else’s shoes. In this vein, to understand empathically is to insist on and give radical attention to the irreducible and ultimate character of the givenness of the other’s experience. For Jasper too, the phenomenological attitude in Solved in his conception of empathic understanding allows him to see the other human being not as a clinical object or an isolated, physiological organism swirling around in a physical universe, but as a human being living a life similar, but never identical, to other human beings.

Phenomenally, this kind of empathic experience is an experience of resonance between oneself and the other person. This basic form of empathy does not require any voluntary and explicit effort, but an attitude which is ethical in nature. Such an immediate under Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians standing is only possible against a background of a similar life-world. We may call this type of empathy, which is at play from the very beginning of our life, nonconative—a kind of spontaneous and pre-reflective attunement between embodied selves through which we implicitly make sense of the other’s behavior.

Yet understanding abnormal experiences (especially psychotic experiences like schizo phrenic, melancholic, or manic ones) is based on a different kind of empathic attitude which departs from the ordinary concept of “empathy.” To achieve this kind of empathy requires a kind of training that goes beyond nonconative empathic skills. Also, at the same time this other type of empathy avoids the pitfalls of conative empathy, that is, of the attempt to understand the other’s experiences based on my own (the clinician’s) per Tonal experiences and on commonsense categories. This kind of empathic attitude can be named second-order empathy. To achieve second-order empathy is a complex process that should be taught in great detail to trainees. First of all one needs to acknowledge the autonomy of the other person, and consequently that the life-world of the other person is not like one’s own. Se Bond, one must learn to neutralize one’s own natural attitude that would make one try to understand the other’s experience as if it took place in a world like one’s own. Third, one must try to reconstruct the existential structures of the world the other lives in. Fourth, one can finally attempt to understand the other’s experience as meaningfully situated in a world that is indeed similar to one’s own, but also constantly and indelibly marked by the other person’s particular existence. The supposition that the other lives in a world just like my own—that is, he experiences time, space, his own body, others, the materiality of objects, etc. just as I do—is often the source of serious misunderstandings. Take the ex ample of lived time: one day for a young man can be lived as growth and fulfillment, whereas an old man may live it as consumption and decline. An anxious person may be af flirted by a feeling that time vanishes, inexorably passes away, that the time that spa rates her from death is intolerably shortened. A patient in an early stage of schizophrenia may experience time as the dawn of a new reality. In order to empathize with these per sons, I need to acknowledge the existential difference, the particular autonomy, which separates me from the way of being-in-the-world that characterizes each of them. Any for getting of this difference will be an obstacle to empathic understanding since these peo ple live in a life-world whose structure is (at least in part) different from my own. Achier ing second-order empathy thus requires me to set aside my own pre-reflective, natural at titude (in which my first-order empathic capacities are rooted), and to approach the other’s world as I would do if I was exploring an unknown and alien country.

Education and Formation Thus psychopathology advocates a kind of curriculum for clinicians that complements professional educational aims (providing assessment and diagnostic skills) with personal formation (providing an epistemologically and ethically sound background for the en counter with patients). Clinicians need personal formation or cultivation alongside a Thor ugh scientific education—restrictively understood as acquisition of technical knowledge Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians and skill training. Time hominem unis libris (“I fear a man who has read only one book”). Besides other sources, training in this area will build on rich resources from Alas sisal philosophy and history of ideas. Since 2001, a full curriculum for philosophy of psychiatry was introduced in the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ curriculum for higher psychiatric training, the “MRCPsych”. Students should be encouraged to read, as well as textbooks, not only essays, but also novels and poetry, as well as paying attention to everything that may help them develop their sensibility to what is other and their interest in making sense of otherness. Cultivating one’s Self ( Bildung ) is a complement to memorizing pieces of professional equipment. Psychopathology provides both educational resources (e.g. valid and reliable concepts and methods for establishing an accurate jag noses) and that kind of sensitivity, namely the sensitivity to what is appropriate in dealing with others, for which knowledge of general principles does not suffice. Next to secondorder empathy, tact, as the ability to feel an atmosphere and to attune with it in those sit Cations that are not yet plainly and unambiguously defined, is an example of this. When evidence-based guidelines are still scarce (as is the case, for instance, with early psychoses), tact seems to be an indispensable resource for the clinician.

The clinical encounter is not only a cognitive-rationalistic performance but also an aes thetic experience. Tact is the sense that is present when one finds its limits in the limits of the other. Atmospheres are haptically experienced: the kind of un derstanding at play is a global awareness of the here-and-now and you-and-I situation, while the limits between oneself and the other are being defined and redefined. In order to grasp atmospheres, one must be predisposed to receive them. In 1907, Husserl wrote a letter to Hofmannsthal, comparing Hofmannsthal’s theory of aesthetics to the phenom nological method which, as he wrote, “requires us to take a stance that is essentially Devi ting from the ‘natural’ stance towards all objectivity, which is closely related to that stance in which your art puts us as a purely aesthetical one with respect to the represent ed objects and the whole environment”. Husserl appears to be referring to the suspension of the natural attitude that would come to sustain the phe nomenological method. The force of an aesthetic attitude in clinical practice resides in two features: the aesthetic properties of an object can only appear if one allows the object’s detachment from one’s intention; the aesthetic properties only arise when the object is stripped of its ordinary meaning. The former resembles the “disinterestedness” that especially psychodynamically-oriented clinicians endorse: to abandon the “desire” to simply eliminate the patient’s symptoms. The second is much closer to the phenomena logical epoché: the clinician has to learn how to avoid his intention of finding symptoms in order to allow the appearance of atmospheres.

The clinical encounter is not only a cognitive-rationalistic performance but also an aes thetic experience. Tact is the sense that is present when one finds its limits in the limits of the other. Atmospheres are haptically experienced: the kind of un derstanding at play is a global awareness of the here-and-now and you-and-I situation, while the limits between oneself and the other are being defined and redefined. In order to grasp atmospheres, one must be predisposed to receive them. In 1907, Husserl wrote a letter to Hofmannsthal, comparing Hofmannsthal’s theory of aesthetics to the phenom nological method which, as he wrote, “requires us to take a stance that is essentially Devi ting from the ‘natural’ stance towards all objectivity, which is closely related to that stance in which your art puts us as a purely aesthetical one with respect to the represent ed objects and the whole environment”. Husserl appears to be referring to the suspension of the natural attitude that would come to sustain the phe nomenological method. The force of an aesthetic attitude in clinical practice resides in two features: the aesthetic properties of an object can only appear if one allows the object’s detachment from one’s intention; the aesthetic properties only arise when the object is stripped of its ordinary meaning. The former resembles the “disinterestedness” that especially psychodynamically-oriented clinicians endorse: to abandon the “desire” to simply eliminate the patient’s symptoms. The second is much closer to the phenomena logical epoché: the clinician has to learn how to avoid his intention of finding symptoms in order to allow the appearance of atmospheres.

The atmosphere’s significance in the clinic encounter has long been recognized. Teller bate considered that during the interaction with a patient, the clinician is led to feel cer Cain atmospheric qualities that exceed the factual, but nevertheless permeate the process of understanding. This led him to develop the concept of “diagnostic atmosphere”. Minkowski used a similar term: diagnostique par penetration to refer to the importance of intuition (the non-cognitive grasping of the meaning of Phenomenological Psychopathology and the Formation of Clinicians a phenomenon), particularly referring to the diagnosis of schizophrenia. These concepts are evidence to the fact that the two authors acknowledged the partaking of atmospheres in the understanding of phenomena.

Atmospheres belong to the pathic moment of experience, the moment when self and world are merged. The pathic transformations impressed by atmospheres are not directly accessible by ordinary language (not to mention to the technical language of general psy chiatry). They can only be indirectly made sense of by a process that is metaphoric in na Cure. The leading role of metaphors in the process of understanding atmospheres reflects the pre-reflective nature of the experience. This process brings expert Once to the reflective realm, but will perpetually remain unfinished, as metaphors do not pin down atmospheres. On the contrary, they enhance atmospheres, amplifying them, and enchaining other metaphors.

The Personal Influence of the Teacher Training institutions should finally recognize the importance of the influence of the teacher upon those who are being taught in the process of professional formation. This obviously implies that not only trainees, but also trainers need to be trained, selected, and supervised. In an age where technical skills are emphasized, teach ing itself can be misunderstood as a technical performance rather than as a human en counter in which the teacher as a person is in the foreground.

This has long been considered a cornerstone in the field of arts, but scientific institutions seem to be tardy to acknowledge the importance—in the positive as well as in the Mega Dive—of the personal contact between mentor and pupil. From this personal encounter emanates an atmosphere which may inspire both. Within this inspiring atmosphere an in stitution may become a seat of learning, research, and knowledge, a place in which preen ciples of thought and conduct can be established, instilled, and transmitted from genera son to generation. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification Anthony Vincent Fernandez The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jan 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter provides an overview of phenomenological approaches to psychiatric class fixation. The aim is to encourage and facilitate philosophical debate over the best ways to classify psychiatric disorders. First, the chapter articulates phenomenological critiques of the dominant approach to classification and diagnosis—that is, the operational approach employed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10). Second, it describes the type or typifica son approach to psychiatric classification, which is distinguished into three different ver ions: ideal types, essential types, and prototypes. It is argued that despite their occasion al conflation in the contemporary literature, there are important differences among these approaches. Third, the chapter outlines a new phenomenological-dimensional approach. It shows how this approach, which starts from basic dimensions of human existence, al lows us to investigate the full range of psychopathological conditions without accepting the validity of current diagnostic categories.

Keywords: classification, diagnosis, phenomenology, types, typification, dimensions, DSM, ICD # Introduction TODAY, the dominant systems of psychiatric classification are the fifth edition of the Dag Gnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013 ) and the tenth edi son of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10; WHO, 2004 )—which, in its forthcoming eleventh edition, will largely converge with the DSM-5. Other systems in Elude the Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual (PDM-2; Lingiardi and McWilliams 2017), which is informed by psychoanalytic approaches, and the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) initiative, a dimensional approach developed by the US National Institute of Men tal Health. The goal of any psychiatric classify Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification cation should be to provide a means of organizing and navigating the complex domain of mental disorders, thereby guiding both clinical practice and scientific research.

Most contemporary approaches aim for a biological classification. They assume that men tal disorders are, at their basis, biological disease entities. The goal of classification is, therefore, to provide a set of categories that maps onto discrete biological diseases. How ever, in light of the DSM’s failure to biologically validate its categories of disorder, psych artists are now looking to alternative approaches that might produce new classifications.

Some of these alternative approaches are grounded in phenomenology, a philosophical study of human experience and existence. Phenomenological psychopathologists describe not only “what it’s like” or “what it feels like” to live with a mental disorder, but also how the structural features of human experience and existence—for example, intentionality, selfhood, temporality, and affectivity—alter in psychopathological cases. At this point, however, none of these classificatory approaches have culminated in a classification scheme like the ones we find in the DSM, ICD, or PDM. Here, I refer to a classificatory approach as a process or method of classifying phenomena. In the case of mental disorders, classificatory approaches might track, for instance, differences in experience, behavior, neurobiology, or treatment response. I refer to a classification scheme as the set of phenomena that an approach has grouped or delineated. In the case of the DSM, for in stance, the scheme is the set of categories included in the manual. Therefore, to say that phenomenologists have developed only classificatory approaches means that they have methods for delineating the range of psychopathological conditions, but they have not ac tally produced their own scheme.

In addressing the topic of phenomenology and psychiatric classification, this chapter has two aims: First, it presents phenomenological critiques of the DSM/ICD approach to Alas sification. Second, it delineates the various phenomenological approaches to classifica son. My intention is not to take a stand on the adequacy of any particular approach. Rather, my intention is to delineate the central features of these approaches side by side, and against the backdrop of the DSM/ICD, so that phenomenologists will be in a better position to debate these approaches and develop more effective systems of classification —for example, systems that more accurately align with neurobiological markers, predict course of illness, or guide targeted therapeutic interventions.

Phenomenological Critiques of Operationalism Since the DSM-third, operationalism has been the dominant approach to classify cation and diagnosis. As employed in the DSM, an “operational approach” is one that cat egorizes and diagnoses disorders by reference to a set of easily observable symptoms, 1 some number of which must be present for a predefined period of time. Major depress chive disorder (major depressive disorder), for example, is diagnosed when at least five of nine possible sump toms are present for at least two weeks. One of these symptoms must be either de pressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure. The other symptoms include signify cant weight loss or weight gain; insomnia or hypersomnia; psychomotor agitation Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification or retardation; fatigue or loss of energy; feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt; diminished ability to think or concentrate; and recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation. Schizophrenia, by contrast, is jag nosed when at least two of five symptoms are present over a one-month period: deli ions; hallucinations; disorganized speech; grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior; and negative symptoms (in addition, at least one of the symptoms must be 2 items 1, 2, or 3).

Notably, the DSM’s major focus has been on enhancing inter-rater reliability— that is, increasing the likelihood that two or more clinicians will diagnose the same pa taint with the same condition. An operational approach, with its reliance on easily observe able symptoms and structured diagnostic interviews, provides an effective means of en Dancing reliability. But psychiatrists want more than reliability—they want validity. In most cases, this takes the form of an appeal to neurobiological underpinnings. However, as Essen Jablensky and Robert Wendell point out, there are numerous definitions of valid ty in psychiatry, with little agreement on which sense of validity should be privileged. A category might be considered valid if it (a) is based on a coherent, explicit set of defining features (construct validity); (b) has empirical referents, such as verifiable observations for establishing its pres Once (content validity); (c) can be corroborated by independent procedures such as biological or psychological tests (concurrent validity); and (d) predicts future course of illness or treatment response (predictive validity).

(Jablensky and Wendell 2002: 10)

In light of this state of affairs, some psychiatrists—including Jablensky and Wendell—ar gue that we should appeal to a concept of utility instead of validity. Utility is achieved when a category or scheme “provides nontrivial information about prognosis and likely treatment outcomes, and/or testable propositions about biological and social correlates” ( Wendell and Jablensky 2003: 9). Considering the DSM’s shortcomings with respect to validity and utility, it has been the subject of widespread criticism from groups both inside and outside of mainstream psychiatry.

Phenomenological psychopathologists constitute one of these critical groups. Phenom nologists don’t necessarily agree on how to approach the problem of validity or utility— some seem to endorse, for example, the view that phenomenology should assist in the process of distinguishing biological disease entities, whereas others defend a less natural istic view. There are, however, three general criticisms of the DSM’s operational ap roach that we find in the phenomenological literature: 1) It ignores how clinicians intuitively diagnose patients.

2) It neglects the organization among the various symptoms, treating them as dis Karate parts without a unified whole.

3) It allows categories to reify, inhibiting future refinement and revision of the class 3 fixation scheme.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification In general, phenomenological approaches to psychiatric classification claim to resolve all of these issues. In what follows, I outline four phenomenological approaches to classifica son, which I divide into two broad classes: type and dimension approaches. The first class includes ideal types, essential types, and prototypes. The second class includes a dime signal approach that I have recently proposed, which draws inspiration from the National Institute of Mental Health’s Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) initiative.

Typification and Classification Before distinguishing the ideal type, essential type, and prototype approaches, it will be helpful to outline what they hold in common. All of these approaches aim to resolve the above shortcomings of the DSM’s operational approach, and they do so in the following ways: 1) They take stock of how clinicians intuitively understand their patients—utilizing, rather than ignoring, this intuitive understanding.

2) They seek an organizing principle, a gestalt, or what Eugene Minkowski calls the trouble générater, that makes sense of the total structure of the disorder.

3) They build in mechanisms for continued revision and refinement, treating current concepts as one step along the way to a better system of classification.

With respect to the first solution, all three approaches share the basic phenomenological insight that we perceive and make sense of our world through tacit types or categories. In everyday experience, these types are not explicitly defined and their boundaries are not always clear. Whenever we perceive something, we perceive it as some particular kind of thing; we never perceive a bare object. For example, if I walk through my garden and see that a rose has bloomed, I simply see it as a rose. In most cases, I don’t list off explicit cri Beria to check whether it’s a rose. I just know what a rose looks like.

But this does’t mean that our typification are never wrong. Perhaps I invite my friend, a botanist, over to show her my rose. Upon walking into the garden, she exclaims, “That’s not a rose! It’s a peony.” Realizing that my initial typification was incorrect, I’m now open to being corrected by my friend. When she corrects me, she might teach me explicit rite ria for distinguishing roses from peonies. And I might rely on these explicit criteria for some time. But, eventually, this too will become habitual and tacit. I’ll develop my own ex pertise, immediately seeing a flower as a rose, a peony, or some other species.

Our typification are, therefore, learned and refined in the course of everyday expert Once. I wan’t born knowing how to identify flowers; I learned what counted as a flower and how to distinguish among different kinds of flowers through everyday experience (and with a little guidance from my parents). And, even now, my ability to tacitly typify or categorize flowers remains relatively limited. The botanist is not only better at distin gushing peonies from roses; she can also distinguish among a wide variety of peonies and roses. And, as an expert, she can distinguish them intuitively, without appealing to explicit criteria. In this respect, to refer to the process of typification as intuitive simply Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification means that it occurs tacitly or implicitly—not that it’s based on an innate or unchanging base of knowledge.

Moreover, seeing as isn’t simply a process of identifying and categorizing objects within the world. In addition to identifying and categorizing, I also have an immediate sense of how to take things up and put them to use. For example, when I see an object on my table as a mug, it immediately shows up to me as a vessel for holding tea, coffee, or hot coco late. It also shows up to me as something I should wash in the kitchen sink or place in the dishwasher. In general, these actions earn’t things that I have to explicitly reflect on or infer. To see an object as a mug just is to see it as something that can perform these fun sons and should be handled in these ways.

Phenomenologists argue that we employ tacit typification not only in our expert Once of everyday objects, but also in our experience of other people. To navigate the so Dial world, we typify people in a variety of ways and these typification guide our initial interactions. When I walk into my classroom, I immediately perceive the people before me as my students and they perceive me as their professor. These tacit typification shape how we engage each other, determining proper modes of address, expected behave Tors, and so on. Such typification can, of course, be pernicious: They might, for instance, become racial or gender stereotypes. However, phenomenologists argue that prejudices earn’t inherently problematic (see e.g. Gadamer 1960/2013, 2008 ). We need presuppose sons and assumptions in order to successfully navigate our environment (although we al so need to be open to revising them in light of future experiences).

But what does everyday typification have to do with the practice of clinical psychology and psychiatry? Proponents of typification argue that clinicians have an intuitive under standing of their patients, and that this understanding often leads to an initial diagnosis. In the clinical encounter, the skilled clinician does’t sim ply perceive a generic person who happens to exhibit an array of symptoms. Her percep son often includes a tacit sense of her patient as depressed, as schizophrenic, as autistic, and so on. This initial perception can guide her process of questioning, helping her arrive at a final diagnosis. The operational, check-list diagnostic method of the DSM-5 ignores this skilled, intuitive mode of understanding and therefore fails to put it to use.

Over the past few decades, intuitive diagnosis has been overshadowed by the operational approach. However, there has been a recent renewal in studies of the effectiveness and accuracy of intuitive modes of diagnosis, focusing both on the diagnosis of schizophrenia and on the ability to identity those at risk of developing schizophrenia (Landau et al. n.d. ). These studies stress that the intuitive approach provides only a pre luminary or tentative diagnosis. An expert psychiatrist should be guided by his typifica sons, but should not simply allow his initial intuition to determine the final diagnosis. Marin Moskalewicz, Michael Schwartz, and Audi Gozé (2018 ) argue that intuitive jag noses, properly conducted, is not simply an immediate sense of the patient’s condition. Rather, it is a temporally extended process in which the psychiatrist critically reflects up on his intuition or typification and seeks out disconfirming evidence. Moreover, they claim Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification that this mode of diagnosis need not conflict with an operational approach. One might, for instance, be led to an initial diagnostic category through intuition, but confirm or disco firm this intuition by employing operational criteria.

This practice of actively confirming or disconfirming an intuitive diagnosis is linked with the practice of revising and refining diagnostic categories themselves. This latter practice is as an attempt to make the diagnostic system more rigorous and scientific. We need to guarantee that our types accurately identify the conditions they’re meant to diagnose and that these types don’t reify into outdated and inaccurate categories. However, the three typification approaches do not necessarily agree on how we should make diagnosis scion tific. Each proposes a slightly different method of harnessing everyday typification, transforming them into scientific concepts and categories.

These approaches are not, however, properly disambiguate in the literature. The Essen ital type and prototype approaches, for instance, are sometimes presented as if they don’t differ in any important respects from the ideal type approach. To head off potential confu ions, I describe each approach below by focusing on their distinctive features, illustrate ing how each proposes a different way of making typification scientific—and, ul timately, a different way of classifying mental disorders.

Ideal Types The ideal type approach is championed by Schwartz and Osborne Wiggins. In the fields of psychology and psychiatry, this approach is rooted in Karl Jasper’s General Psy chopathology (1913/1997). But Jasper himself adapted it from Max Weber’s initial pro postal. Weber, the founder of modern sociology, argued that social phenomena could not be classified in the same manner as natural objects. The sociologist cannot create a Alas sification akin to the periodic table of elements because social phenomena do not have hard boundaries—their manifestations are fluid and variable. To better capture the fea Cures of social phenomena, Weber developed the notion of an ideal type. As he defines it, An ideal type is formed by the one-sided accentuation of one or more points of view and by the synthesis of a great many diffuse, discrete, more or less present and occasionally absent concrete individual phenomena, which are arranged ac cording to those one-sidedly emphasized viewpoints into a unified analytical construct ( Gedankenbild ). In its conceptual purity, this mental construct (Gedankenbild ) cannot be found empirically anywhere in reality. It is a utopia.

(Weber 1949: 90)

What is most important here—at least with respect to differentiating the phenomenology cal approaches to classification—is that the ideal type is not an empirical reality. It is ide al in the sense of being pure, uncontaminated by the messy details of the concrete world.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification But what makes ideal types scientific? As Schwartz and Wiggins explain, ideal types are heuristic devices. They provide the community of researchers and clinicians with a means of conceptually organizing their subject matter. As heuristic devices, ideal types earn’t taken as “true”—that is, they earn’t judged with respect to how accurately they represent some aspect of reality. Rather, by characterizing her concept as an ideal type, the re searcher or clinician admits that no instance of the disorder in question will correspond exactly with her concept; the concrete manifestation might lack certain features included in the ideal type, or express additional features not included in the ideal type (Schwartz and Wiggins 1987a: 283). And, as Schwartz and Wiggins argue, this lack of perfect fit en Dances the scientific value of ideal types; the precise ways in which the concrete instance of the disorder fails to correspond with the ideal type can guide the processes of both clinical diagnosis and scientific research.

The clinician’s goal—as Schwartz and Wiggins present it—is to understand the patient in his particularity. Therefore, the ways in which the patient diverges from the ideal type can guide further inquiry into the unique nature of his individual condition. One of the 4 researcher’s goals, by contrast, is to produce a naturalistic or biological classification. In this case, the ideal type provides a shared starting point for constructing hy potheses and carrying out experiments. As Schwartz and Wiggins explain, For psychiatric research, ideal types furnish the initial conceptual guidelines for the postulation of law-like regularities and the design of experiments to test such postulates. For clinical practice, ideal types predelineate the features of disorders so that clinicians know what to search for, focus on, and examine in particular pa taints.

(Schwartz and Wiggins 1987a: 286)

Because ideal types are heuristic devices, their value is based entirely on their utility. If the community of researchers and clinicians finds that altering the ideal type (or replay ing it altogether) better guides their research and clinical practice, then they are free to make such alterations or replacements. In this respect, the set of ideal types used to de lineage the field of mental disorders is not taken as a definitive system of classification. It 5 is one step along the way.

Essential Types The essential type approach was proposed by Josef Paras and Dan Zahavi (2002 ) (al though they do not call it by this name). Paras and Zahavi ground their approach in Husserlian phenomenology: “a tradition specifically aiming at grasping the essential structures of human experience and existence ” (2002: 143). However, there is an ambigu ity in their adaptation of this approach to the study of mental disorders. They initially characterize their phenomenological approach to psychiatric diagnosis and classification as if it is identical with Schwartz and Wiggins’s approach: Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification A concept of “ideal type” or “essence” plays here an important role. Ideal type ex Amplifies the ideal and necessary connections between its composing features.

Ideal type transcends what is given in experience: e.g. all my possible drawings of a straight line will be somehow deficient (for instance if examined through a mi croscope) compared to the very (ideal) concept of a straight line.

(Paras and Zahavi 2002: 157)

Here, Paras and Zahavi appeal directly to Schwartz and Wiggins’s (1987a ) ideal types. But their further characterizations seem to present a substantially different project; as Matthew Brooke has pointed out, Paras and Zahavi seem to conflate Weberian ideal types with Husserlian essences (Brooke 2006: 311).

If we look further into how Paras and Zahavi characterize their approach, we find a key distinction between ideal types and essential types, which hinges on their relation to ne cessity. According to Paras and Zahavi, the “[p]Phenomenological approach to anomalous experience is precisely concerned with bringing forth the typical, and ideally necessary features of such experience” (2002: 157; my emphasis). As they explain, their approach identifies essential features of categories of mental disorder, rather than just essential features of human experience as such. In order to discover these essential fea Cures, they suggest that that we employ Husserl’s eidetic reduction, which involves a process of imaginative variation: This process of imaginative variation will lead us to certain borders that cannot be varied, i.e. changed and transgressed, without making the phenomenon cease to be the kind of phenomenon it is. The variation consequently allows us to distin gush between the accidental properties, i.e. the properties that could have been different, and the essential properties, i.e. the invariant structures that make the phenomenon be of the type it is.

(Paras and Zahavi 2002: 157)

On this approach, a condition that fails to display an essential feature simply won’t count as the disorder in question. Paras and Zahavi’s emphasis on essential features will, therefore, produce more rigid categories than Schwartz and Wiggins’s ideal types be cause ideal types do not identify necessary features of disorders; they are heuristic de vices with no truth value. But this is not to suggest that Paras and Zahavi’s categories will not be amenable to revision and refinement. As they explain, to claim that something is an essential feature of a disorder is not to claim that this has been proved once and for all. It’s possible that one was mistaken in labeling a feature “essential.” Future phenom nological analyses might provide reason to believe that the feature is contingent or acct dental (even if common or typical) (Paras and Zahavi 2002: 157).

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification Prototypes The prototype approach, like ideal type and essential type approaches, is intended to make the everyday process of typification scientific. Paras and Shaun Gallagher propose prototypes as an alternative to operational classification and diagnosis. Accord ing to Paras and Gallagher, “A prototype is a central example of a category in question (a sparrow is more characteristic of the category ‘bird’ than is a penguin or an ostrich), with a graded dilution of typicality toward the borders of the category, where it eventually overlaps exemplars from neighboring categories” (2015: 73; my emphasis). As they char acterize it here, a prototype is neither a topic ideal nor a clearly defined essence. Unlike an ideal type, a prototype is a concrete exemplar of the disorder, which necessarily im plies that such an exemplar actually exists. And, unlike an essential type, a prototype does not establish a set of necessary and essential features of the condition in question. Rather, the prototype is itself a concrete instance of the condition. Other conditions are categorized based on how closely they match this particular instance.

Moreover, Paras and Gallagher characterize their particular version of prototypes as a “prototype-gestalt,” which highlights the unity and organization of symptoms. However, an apparent contradiction arises in their characterization of the gestalt. They say, “A gestalt instantiates a certain generality of type. Yet, this type-generality is always de formed, because it inheres in a particular, concrete and situated individual. The particu lar token always attenuates the ideal clarity and pregnancy of type” (2015: 75). By sug Besting that there is no perfect, concrete instance of the condition, Paras and Gallagher characterize their approach as if it’s akin to Schwartz and Wiggins’s ideal types—and they refer directly to Schwartz and Wiggins’s work on the topic (1987a, 1987b). This seems to contradict their initial characterization: They initially argued that—on their pro totype approach—categories are defined, or anchored, by appealing to a con Crete exemplar. But if the prototype or exemplar is an imperfect instantiation of its ate gory—as they suggest in their second characterization—then it can’t be what’s anchoring the category; the prototype does not stand, as it were, in the center of the category. Par nas and Gallagher seem to appeal to an ideal type with respect to which the prototype it self is judged as adequate or inadequate.

I don’t mean to suggest that this apparent contradiction is necessarily unresolvable. There might be some manner of reconciling these two approaches: For example, the pro totype might be a useful diagnostic or teaching tool, while the ideal type is what the psy chiatrist ultimately appeals to when revising his classificatory scheme. However, Paras and Gallagher don’t seem to acknowledge the apparent contradiction in the first place, 6 and therefore offer no resolution of their own.

In addition to this ambiguity, another confusion arises when we consider Schwartz, Wig gins, and Michael Norko’s early work on the relationship between ideal types and prototypes. However, I believe this confusion can be avoided once we under stand that their critique of prototypes does not apply to the version presented by Paras and Gallagher. Schwartz, Wiggins, and Norko suggest that prototypes have two major Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification shortcomings: First, prototypes consist of a set of attributes without conceptual unity; Jasper, for example, says that a prototype is “a disjointed enumeration” of features (Schwartz et al. 1989: 6). Second, prototypes cannot produce novel concepts because they are constructed by surveying psychiatrists about how they diagnose and understand their patients—prototypes merely reflect the current understanding of mental disorders (1989: 6). However, from the above account, it should be clear that neither of these cri Piques apply to Paras and Gallagher’s prototype approach. Despite the ambiguities in their approach, they clearly posit a gestalt organization among the prototype’s features and they do not believe that prototypes are constructed by merely surveying and average ing typical ways of understanding mental disorders.

Dimensions Until recently, all phenomenological approaches to classification and diagnosis have been type approaches. However, I have proposed a phenomenological-dimensional approach to 7 psychiatric research and classification. The primary motivation be hind this approach is psychiatry’s recent shift from categorical approaches to dimensional approaches. By “dimensional,” I do not refer to the DSM-5’s construction of new, graded categories, such as autism spectrum disorder. Rather, I refer to approaches that dispense with categories altogether, beginning, instead, from basic aspects of human ex perience or behavior. If psychiatry continues in this direction—which seems likely—then the gulf between phenomenology’s categorical approach and mainstream psychiatry will only widen. In light of this, I’ve suggested that phenomenologists embrace a broadly di mensional approach, thereby reducing barriers to interdisciplinary collaboration between phenomenologists and psychiatrists.

Psychiatry’s major dimensional approach is the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) initio Dive developed by the US National Institute of Mental Health. The RDoC aims to produce a new research classification (i.e. one not currently intended for use in clinical practice) based on dimensions or constructs (the terms are used interchangeably) of human expert Once and behavior. Constructs are clustered into broad domains, such as Cognitive Sys ems or Social Processes. The Social Processes domain includes, for example, the con struts of Affiliation and Attachment, Social Communication, Perception and Understand ing of Self, and Perception and Understanding of Others. Some of these constructs are then divided into subconstructs. For example, Perception and Understanding of Self in Eludes the subconstructs of Agency and Self-Knowledge. By orienting research through this matrix, researchers achieve two ends: First, they can investigate psychopathological conditions without framing their investigations through the lens of invalid DSM ate Dories. Second, they can study how this dimension manifests across both normal and ab normal conditions; they might study, for instance, how agency is compromised across sub Sects who would typically be diagnosed with depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophre nia.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification How can we develop a dimensional approach for use in phenomenology? While a broadly dimensional approach might draw inspiration from the RDoC, it need not conform with the RDoC matrix (i.e. its set of domains, constructs, and subconstructs). I have argued that a phenomenological matrix of domains and dimensions can be drawn from what Hei dagger calls “existential,” and other phenomenologists refer to as “transcendental,” “es sential,” or “ontological” structures. Each existential is a basic feature of human existence, such as intentionality, selfhood, affectivity, or temporality. These existential constitute the basic domains of phenomenological psychopathology, with each existential further distinguished into its various structural moments, or fea Cures, which constitute its dimensions. The domain (or existential) of Selfhood, for in stance, can include the dimensions of Core Self and Narrative Self, with each dimension further subdivided or specified as required. The Core Self might include features such as Cognition and Stream of Consciousness; Self-Awareness and Presence; Bodily Experience; and Demarcation/Transitivism of the self–world boundary (see Paras et 8 al. 2005). We can then investigate each of these domains, constructs, and subconstructs across the full range of normal and abnormal experience, moving beyond current jag 9 Gnostic categories.

My phenomenological-dimensional approach is—at this time—only a proposal. However, some phenomenologists have already conducted studies with a broadly dime signal outlook. I briefly outline two of these studies here with the intention of providing some insight into what a phenomenological-dimensional approach might look like in pram ice. First, I outline Louis Sass and Elizabeth Pinkos’s comparative study of selfhood across melancholia, bipolar mania, and schizophrenia. Second, I outline Matthew Radcliffe’s study of temporal disturbances in depressive disorders. While these authors don’t explicitly characterize their work as dimensional in the sense I’ve described here, these studies investigate how basic existential structures alter across psychopathological conditions; they’re framed through what I’ve called the basic domains and dimensions of human existence, rather than through current diagnostic categories.

My phenomenological-dimensional approach is—at this time—only a proposal. However, some phenomenologists have already conducted studies with a broadly dime signal outlook. I briefly outline two of these studies here with the intention of providing some insight into what a phenomenological-dimensional approach might look like in pram ice. First, I outline Louis Sass and Elizabeth Pinkos’s comparative study of selfhood across melancholia, bipolar mania, and schizophrenia. Second, I outline Matthew Radcliffe’s study of temporal disturbances in depressive disorders. While these authors don’t explicitly characterize their work as dimensional in the sense I’ve described here, these studies investigate how basic existential structures alter across psychopathological conditions; they’re framed through what I’ve called the basic domains and dimensions of human existence, rather than through current diagnostic categories.

Sass and Pinkos study how one dimension of experience—the core self—alters across three categories of disorder. One feature of the core self that they explore is the expert Once of the self–world boundary, or the way in which I experience myself and my identity in relation with my environment. As they argue, in melancholia the boundary between self and world is enhanced or increased; the world feels distant or unreachable. In mania, by contrast, the boundary between self and world is significantly diminished, sometimes cul minting in an experience of mystic union (Sass and Pinkos 2013: 124). We might as Fume that this manic experience is akin to schizophrenia, which also involves a dimin shed self–world boundary. However, Sass and Pinkos argue that this apparent similarity is superficial. If we carefully attend to the way this dimension of experience can change, we’ll find that there are important differences in the experience of the self–world bound ary between mania and schizophrenia. The experiences differ in two key respects: First, in mania the diminished self–world boundary is typically accompanied by a positive or neutral mood, whereas in schizophrenia it is typically accompanied by feelings of anxiety in which the subject feels invaded by the external world. Second, in mania there is often a Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification sense of oneness with the world, whereas schizophrenia can include a sense of solipsism (the world is produced by my mind and has no independent reality).

While Sass and Pinkos’s study still refers to current diagnostic categories, the ate Dories don’t frame their investigation. Rather, their investigation is framed through the dimension of selfhood, which allows them to test and further articulate categorical bound Aries. Such an investigation would be impossible if a study were confined to a particular category or had to assume the validity of current diagnostic categories from the start. Moreover, this suggests that dimensional and categorical approaches need not be mutually exclusive. A dimensional approach might help us refine clinical diagnostic categories.

Another broadly dimensional approach is employed in Matthew Radcliffe’s study of tempo ral disturbances in depressive disorders. Instead of comparing different diagnostic ate Dories, Radcliffe uses a dimensional analysis to assess the alleged homogeneity of depress chive disorders. By showing that people diagnosed with depression report a variety of tem oral disturbances, he casts doubt on the belief that we’ve identified a single, unified con Edition, and motivates the project of reclassifying depressive disorders.

Many people with depression report changes in their temporal experience, such as the sense of time slowing down or stretching out (similar to the temporal experience of bore dom). Radcliffe, however, argues that if we attend more carefully to descriptions of tempo ral experience in depressive episodes, we’ll find a wide variety of temporal disturbances expressed across these reports. Radcliffe clusters these disturbances into three groups: loss of significance, loss of conative drive, and loss of life projects. First, some people report that future possibilities are not enticing or worth purse ing. Among this group, some report that future possibilities are insignificant as such— that is, future possibilities are experienced as having no significance for anyone. Others report that possibilities are insignificant for themselves but understand that others might experience them as significant. Second, some people report that future possibilities are significant and worth pursuing, yet they lack any drive or motivation to pursue them. Third, some people report that future possibilities don’t show up at all; they have no sense of who they might be in the future. This is often accompanied by a sense that one will never escape their depression (Radcliffe 2012: 121; see also Aho 2013; Fernandez 2014; Maiese 2018). Any of these disturbances might be experienced independently of the others, but there are also cases in which multiple disturbances occur simultaneously.

Radcliffe concludes that the diversity of temporal disturbances across people diagnosed with depressive disorders—specifically, with major depressive disorder—suggests that we might not be dealing with one homogeneous condition. There might be a heterogeneity of conditions that, due to imprecise diagnostic criteria, are classed as a single category of disorder. As Radcliffe says, I have suggested that “depression” and more specific subcategories of depression such as “major depression” encompass a range of subtly different changes in the structure of temporal experience. I have not attempted to provide a comprehend Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification chive taxonomy here. However, I have offered the beginnings of an interpretive framework for doing so and explored at least some of the variety.

(Radcliffe 2012: 134)

While Radcliffe does’t provide a new classification scheme of depressive disorders, he does provide some tools that might help us construct a new scheme. These examples sug est that a dimensional approach can undermine the validity of current diagnostic ate Dories, motivate the need for a new classification, and provide new conceptual distinct sons that can be used to reclassify psychopathological conditions.

While I believe there are good reasons for phenomenologists to move toward a dime signal approach, I want to suggest that this new approach might be compatible with type approaches. Type approaches seek the basic organizing principle of the disorder in ques son—the trouble générater or core gestalt. They aim not only to under stand the relationship between parts and whole, but also to identify the core disturbance from which the various symptoms arise. In the case of schizophrenia, for instance, many phenomenologists have argued that the variety of symptoms can be tied to a core disturb Dance in the structure of selfhood; once we understand how selfhood has altered in schizo ophrenia, we can make sense of a variety of experiences, such as hallucinations as well as delusions of thought insertion and alien control. These experiences arise because of a breakdown in the sense of agency and ownership of one’s thoughts, feelings, and percep sons. A dimensional approach, with its focus on identifying and articulating alterations in specific domains and dimensions of human existence, provides a method of identifying these core disturbances. If such an approach is viable, then phenomenology’s type and di Pension approaches will not only coexist, but can be mutually complementary.

Conclusion In this chapter I have provided an overview of phenomenological approaches to psych attic classification. First, I articulated phenomenological critiques of the operational ap roach: It ignores how clinicians intuitively diagnose patients, it neglects the org nization among various symptoms, and it allows categories to reify. Second, I de Ascribed three different type or typification approaches to psychiatric classification—ideal types, essential types, and prototypes—and showed how these approaches differ (despite their occasional conflation in the contemporary literature). Third, I outlined a phenom nological-dimensional approach to psychiatric classification, which starts from existed Dials, or basic domains of human existence, rather than current diagnostic categories.

My intention, however, was not to argue for the superiority of the dimensional approach over type approaches. Rather, the primary aim of this chapter is to encourage and facile ate philosophical debate over the best ways to classify psychiatric disorders. Phenom nology has the potential to make substantial contributions to the project of psychiatric classification. But its internal ambiguities and inconsistencies will need to be resolved be Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification fore phenomenologists can move forward with a classification scheme of their own. This overview of the field should provide a useful starting point for future dialogue and de bate. PAGE_BREAK 1 ( ) In contemporary psychiatry, what goes under the label of “operationalism” is relatively superficial when compared with its early philosophical and scientific development in the work of Carl Hempen, Edwin Boring, and Percy Williams Bridgman. While psychiatry’s version of operationalism likely has its roots in this history, one should not assume that it takes over the fairly robust philosophical programs of these early fig res. For a more detailed account of the history of operationalism in psychology and psy chiatry, see Hasok Chang and Josef Paras and Pierre Covet.

2 ( ) Each diagnostic category includes additional criteria, such as significant impairment of one’s ability to work, engage in self-care, or maintain social relations.

3 ( ) This situation is even more problematic when a diagnostic category encompasses a heterogeneity of conditions, as we find in the case of major depressive disorder.

4 ( ) Among phenomenologists, it’s by no means universally accepted that a biological Alas sification should be our ultimate goal. However, in at least some of Schwartz and Wiggins’s presentations of their program, the ideal type approach is characterized as a step along the way to a biological classification.

5 ( ) This characterization is, notably, in contrast with Weber’s use of ideal types. Weber’s goal was not to use ideal types as a step toward a naturalistic conceptualization of social phenomena. Rather, he thought that social phenomena were best classified through ideal types.

6 ( ) These ambiguities are compounded by Paras and Gallagher’s apparent use of “photo type” and “exemplar” as synonyms. In their initial characterization of their prototype ap roach, they appeal to Edouard Zachery’s work on concept formation. But Zachery clearly distinguishes between “prototype” and “exemplar” approaches to concept Korma son. As he describes it, “a prototype of a class is a body of statistical knowledge about the properties deemed to be possessed by members of this class” ( Zachery 2009: 83). An exemplar, by contrast, “is a body of knowledge about the properties believed to be pos Fessed by a particular member of a class” ( Zachery 2009: 93). In light of this, it seems that Paras and Gallagher’s proposal is akin to an “exemplar” approach, which therefore diverges substantially from what’s often called a “prototype” approach.

7 ( ) Thomas Fuchs and Mauro Pallagrosi have also proposed the use of a dimensional ap roach for the study of psychopathological temporality.

8 ( ) These items are adapted from the Examination of Anomalous Self Experience (EASE). As I’ve argued elsewhere, the EASE does not translate directly into the kind of dimensional approach I am proposing, but some of its items can be appropriate ed for dimensional analysis.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification 9 ( ) For a more complete account of a phenomenological-dimensional approach, including illustrative examples, see Fernandez.

Anthony Vincent Fernandez Department of Philosophy, University of South Florida Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychiatric Classification 9 ( ) For a more complete account of a phenomenological-dimensional approach, including illustrative examples, see Fernandez.

Anthony Vincent Fernandez Department of Philosophy, University of South Florida Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Deli ion-Making Eduardo Iacoponi and Harvey Wickham The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jul 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter examines how the phenomenological approach to psychopathology con tributes to clinical decision making in psychiatry. It first considers competing forces in psychiatric clinical decision making, focusing in particular on the barriers that patients face in their search for a clinician to make their stories real. It then discusses factors that have contributed to the decline of phenomenological psychopathology, including the in crease in importance of diagnostic classifications in psychiatry such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 3rd edition; changes in the delivery of public mental health services; and increased attention to risk assessment for severe mental illness. It also describes clinical encounters with two patients that illus rate how phenomenological psychiatry can still contribute to sound clinical decision making.

Keywords: clinical decision making, phenomenological psychopathology, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 3rd edition, public mental health services, risk assessment, mental illness, phenomenological psychiatry The Father, speaking to the Director: “I say that to reverse the ordinary process may well be considered a madness: that is, to create credible situations, in order that they may appear true. But permit me to observe that if this be madness, it is the sole raisin d’être of your profession, gentlemen.”

(from Six Characters in Search of an Author, Pirandello 1921: 7)

Introduction CLINICAL decision-making in medicine and psychiatry is a complex and multi-layered process that is influenced by a variety of factors. There has been in creasing interest in a more precise understanding of why clinicians choose one diagnosis or intervention over another, in the hope that such an understanding might reduce errors. Concepts about decision-making, borrowed from non-clinical fields such as business tho Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making ry and economic analysis, have been employed in various clinical settings. The awareness that heuristic biases often carry the risk of systematic cognitive er Tors has also contributed to the thinking about decision-making in clinical practice. More recently, thanks to developments in technology and informatics, there has been considerable interest in using operational clinical guidelines to develop algorithmic computer programs that supposedly will event ally replace fallible clinicians.

In the practice of psychiatry, factors related to the psychiatrist, the patient, and to their clinical encounter, are known to influence clinical decision-making. One of the main factors is the information obtained during the inter action between patient and clinician. Magnavita, in a recent review, proposed that effective clinical decision-making in mental health practice is sus Gained by five pillars: (a) access to high-quality empirical evidence, such as Blini cal trials and other data about outcomes of clinical interventions; (b) building of clinical expertise, which is the gradual accumulation of objective and tacit knowledge over years of apprenticeship and clinical practice; (c) use of sound theoretical constructs, stemming from biomedical or psychological and social models; (d) use of ethical considerations; and (e) knowledge of decision theory. Within the second pillar lies, possibly, the contribution of the clinician’s expertise in the application of phenomenological psychopathology.

The Phenomenological Approach It is, to the authors’ minds, somewhat puzzling that the phenomenological approach to psychopathology does not appear to have greater recognition in the psychiatric clinical decision-making literature. Since its inception last century (Jasper 1913/1968; Jasper 1913/1997; Wiggins and Schwartz 2013 ), it has been hailed as key to the detailed descrip son and understanding of the problems presented by our patients. In bringing the phe nomenological method into clinical practice, it is not necessary to utilize the strict out look of bracketing or “ epoché,” with its radical suspension of all preconceptions and jug Bent when listening to our patients. Radcliffe (2009 ) described what he calls a modest ap roach as: A phenomenological stance... is a methodological shift, whereby one comes to appreciate that there are certain questions which cannot be satisfactorily ad dressed from the standpoint of empirical science or from any other standpoint that takes a sense of reality for granted. This stance does not demand the total re oval of all existential commitment from one’s methodological orientation. What is required is the acknowledgment that there is an experientially constituted sense of reality and belonging, coupled with a commitment to study and attempt to describe this and other aspects of experience, using whatever means are at our disposal.

(Radcliffe 2009: 227)

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making This constitutes a unique opportunity to enter the realm of our patients. In Sass and Vole’s (2013 ) words:... subjective symptoms... are emotions, inner processes, and sensory manifest Cations like fear, grief or cheerfulness [that] cannot be perceived by sensory or ans but only by putting ourselves into another’s soul, by empathy—the only Blini cal method which allows depicting as clearly as possible the various inner psycho logical conditions as they are experienced by the patients.

(Sass and Vole 2013: 187)

By enabling access to patients’ inner lives, obtaining evidence during clinical encounters, and bringing the opportunity for patients to relive and reflect on their experiences, the phenomenological method makes an unquestionably significant contribution to clinical decisionmaking in psychiatry.

Competing Forces in Clinical Decision- # Making in Psychiatry The phenomenological approach, despite all its praised advantages, has always had to compete for space with other models and theories of psychopathology. When it came into existence a century ago, it placed itself outside the forces of neurobiology and psycho analysis, almost as an attempt to solve what was already then an intractable impasse be tween these dominant models. Psychiatrists at the time, unconvinced by any overarching explanation for their patients’ plight, opted to make regular use of this new approach.

But the past decades have seen fewer psychiatrists reliably engaging with the phenom nological approach. At least, this is the impression that we have from practicing psychic try in inner city London. Our patients, like Pirandello’s characters, have to wait a long time before their stories are sensibly embraced, and before a meaningful understanding of their problems can begin. This delay will be illustrated in the clinical encounters de Ascribed later in this chapter. The barriers that our patients face in their search for a Blini Xian to make their stories real are many and diverse. Several reasons have been consed red to explain such shrinking in the influence of phenomenological psychopathology.

Widespread Use of Diagnostic Manuals Andreasen associated the decline of phenomenology with the increase in imper Dance of diagnostic classifications in psychiatry such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 3rd edition, suggesting that phenom nology was sacrificed in the search of the golden fleece of reliability in psychiatric jag noses. Although in many ways an advance in the understand ing of and communication about psychiatric disorders, the reliance on di agnostic manuals rendered psychiatry a hostage to symptoms checklists. By feeding the illusion of objectivity, the diagnostic manuals, even in their latest versions ( Diagnostic and Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making Statistical Manual, 5th edition, American Psychiatric Association 2013) have marginalized other valid ways—such as phenomenology—of confronting the inevitable uncertainty of our patients’ complex presentations.

Shape of Mental Health Services Other reasons for the supposed decline of phenomenological psychopathology have also been considered. In England, for instance, some of the changes in the delivery of public mental health services resulted in a shift of attention from psychopathology to behavior during increasingly reduced periods of inpatient care, with patients being discharged from hospital wards as soon as their behavior is settled, allowing minimal time for indepth exploration of their psychopathology. Moreover, the changes in the delivery of services have markedly reduced the time that clinicians are allowed to spend with patients, practically eroding their ability to explore symptoms and bringing phenomenological clinical practice to a point of near total marginalization.

Once under the care of community teams, our patients, now in contact with a completely different group of clinicians, are encouraged, under the predominant “Recovery Ap roach”, to talk about their strengths rather than their symptoms, limiting the opportunity to further explore the nature of their psychopatholo gy.

Getting Rid of Symptoms Another reason proposed for the reduced emphasis in psychopathology is the growth over the past fifty years of the therapeutic interventions targeted at the amelioration and con tool of symptoms. Advances in psychopharmacology, and psychological therapies such as cognitive behavior theta py and acceptance and commitment therapy have been made. These achievements, not available when asylum psychiatry was dominant, have understandably resulted in an intense pressure to use every interaction with pa taints for the evaluation and application of the new therapies.

In this therapeutic-oriented context, when clinicians meet their patients, it is implied that the aim of the encounter is to get rid of symptoms and not to explore them, therefore cir cumscribing even further the use of the phenomenological approach.

Dominance of Risk Assessment Concurrently, in England, there has been a dramatic increase in the attention given to the risks associated with severe mental illness, particularly the risk of harm to others and the risk of suicide. Only the fool hardy might argue that the assessment of risk is an unimportant aspect of psychiatric Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making care. Indeed, the authors contend that a phenomenology-oriented approach is possibly the best way to obtain a meaningful understanding of risk.

But this is not what is observed in current clinical practice. Instead, the already limited time spent with patients is being used to complete standardized risk assessment forms— required for financial indemnity rather than clinical purposes —that have limited, if any, predictive value. Beyond the pointlessness of such forms is the upsetting fact that our patients clearly become withdrawn when they notice that, during the clinical interaction, we are more concerned about ourselves (worries about in queries, media exposure, peer criticism, job loss) than about their plight. It then takes a good clinician, and the development of a trustful relationship, for our patients to re-en age in an empathic interview and allow a more relevant exploration of their thinking.

Training to Become a Psychiatrist: Physical or Mental Health Care Psychiatrists, like other clinicians, learn how to practice mainly through observing others in action during several years of apprenticeship. During this period they also develop mechanisms of defense that will protect them from the considerable and relentless suffer ing they are exposed to. If, in their training, junior psychiatrists don’t see their seniors en aged into the phenomenological approach to psychopathology, they are less likely to overcome their own fears of empathizing with severely disturbed patients, and less likely to find themselves in situations and settings that promote a closer contact and a better understanding of the clinical problems.

In addition to the lack of opportunity to observe phenomenological interviews, trainee psychiatrists in England now have to comply with the recent national call to improve the quality of our patients’ physical health care. Here again, no one would dispute the imper Dance of measures aimed at reducing the unacceptably high levels of physical morbidity and mortality our patients face. But, in practice, these measures came to depend considerably on the general medical knowledge of trainee psychiatrists, who have ended up being responsible for performing physical examinations and investigations and for referrals to cardiologists or endocrine physicians, and a host of other tasks. And this means less and less time for trainees to become involved with the assessment and management of complex clinical presentations, as is the metier of psychiatrists.

And these general medicine knowledge and skills are surely measured in end-of-training examinations, particularly in standardized assessments with role players, which mandatorily include physical examination stations. The format of these sta sons, each of which lasts seven to ten minutes, basically bans the assessment of the skills needed for a phenomenological interview, and it drives psychiatric trainees not only to the practice of very brief and fragmented interactions with patients, but also to the belief that mechanized interviewing is the gold standard of psychiatric practice.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making # Clinical Encounters Given all these barriers, it is somewhat surprising that phenomenological psychiatry can still contribute to sound clinical decision-making. In a dialectical manner, perhaps there is a limit beyond which we cannot crush any further the search for meaningful connections lingering behind the symptoms.

The following clinical encounters will illustrate this point. They are pointedly more de tailed than the short and context-less descriptions commonly found in the psychiatric lit erasure. While based on patients we’ve met over the years, they do not portray any Hindi visual in particular. We trust that there is no way that anyone can recognize himself or herself from the following accounts. While these clinical encounters are fairly typical of our practice, and while they do reflect our main clinical approach, they are by no means representative of all the encounters we have we our patients.

The Case of Mil Mil was taken by his friend to an emergency department on Good Friday after he had been found wandering the streets of London naked in a confused state. One of his friends reported that for the fortnight before, he had been abusing drugs, behaving strangely, and expressing odd ideas about witches. When interviewed by a junior doctor Mil calmly explained that he had stepped outside his front door after waking from sleep, that the door shut suddenly behind him, and he had been walking around to find a way back in side his home. When questioned regarding his beliefs about witches he explained that he could not tell much more as nobody would understand him. He added that he was about to be married to somebody who was unknown to him, but din’t elaborate further on this subject either. The junior doctor recorded that although Mil had some strange beliefs, they dissociative identity disorder not appear to hold delusional intensity. He was discharged from the emergency department with a plan for a follow-up appointment with the local community mental health services. No diagnosis was made on this occasion.

He never attended any appointment with the community team. Three months later he was admitted to hospital involuntarily due to disturbed behavior that included stripping off his clothes, urinating on the floor, standing motionless with his face pressed against an inter nal window, and giving bizarre answers to questions. Mil was unable to explain why he was in hospital, stating that he hand’t done anything wrong or disruptive, wan’t loud, or displaying inappropriate behavior. He then became guarded, stating he was a very imper ant person, had several security guards and servants at home, and hence could not give further information due to the “privacy of his social status.” It was recorded by the oncall trainee psychiatrist that Mil was experiencing psychotic symptoms. When reviewed the following day by the ward trainee psychiatrist, the impression was that Mil had returned to his usual “jovial” self and could be discharged from hospital. A diagnosis of acute stress reaction in the context of a mixed personality was made. Later that day Mil was briefly reviewed by the senior psychiatrist, who dissociative identity disorder not probe for psychotic symptoms but Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making cemented the plan for Mil to be discharged from hospital and to be re-referred to the lo cal community mental health team.

Three days later Mil was arrested for arson, having lit rubbish he had amassed outside a neighbor’s front door. He was subsequently convicted and sentenced to prison for High teen months. His next contact with mental health professionals occurred a few months af ter his release from prison, when he was arrested after he was found again piling rubbish against his neighbor’s door and attempting to light it. Back in hospital, it became clear to all involved that it would not be possible to care for Mil without an adequate compare Pension of what was going on in his mind.

“Why do you think you are you here Mil?” was the first question that the senior psychic Grist asked him. But this time the question was asked in the context of a desire to under stand, through accurate empathy, active listening, questioning, clarification, confront son, exploration, interpretation, reframing, reflection, and silence. Mil’s trust eventually evolved and, in turn, his story unfolded. He told of a kernel of unease developing into a pervasive feeling of persecution, and crystallizing into a realization of Christian malefic Fence being practiced against him by a neighbor. Driven by what he believed to be the neighbors’ intolerance of his sexuality, Mil became convinced that his own conversion to Judaism through marriage would be a proselytistic act of such significance that all Chris sans would be prevented from practicing their faith, and this would in turn re lease him from his suffering. Their sorcery, however, foiled this divine plan, and so Mil set about burning the witches, a method of execution employed by many societies for ac tivities considered criminal, such as witchcraft and homosexuality. He felt safe from his Christian neighbors when he was in prison, but as soon as he returned home their Terse cation of him continued. This time, with his story properly told, Mil was successfully treated in hospital, with all his symptoms resolving and his insight completely regained. Unfortunately, a combination of legal injunctions and eviction meant that he was unable to return to his home of twenty years. The missed opportunity for practicing phenomena logical psychopathology earlier had a real and significant impact on Mil and on those around him.

The Case of Fredric When Fredric was in the second year of his sociology degree, he experienced something completely new: a sense of being observed all the time, of being connected to a global network of people who, like him, cared about the future of planet Earth. It wan’t un pleasant, and it din’t worry him much, but it was unusual. He was twenty-one years old at the time. He frequently smoked cannabis with friends, but not more or less often than he had done before going to University. He’d been quite happy since leaving his parents’ home in London, and kept regular contact with them on social media.

About a year later, and a few months before his final exams, the experiences became more intense. He had the impression that he was under constant surveillance and started thinking he had done something wrong, although he wan’t sure what. His friends had Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making noticed some changes in his behavior, but only felt the need to take him to the emergency department when he stopped talking, eating, and sleeping. Fredric agreed to be admitted to the local psychiatric ward.

Helped by sedative medication, Fredric slept solidly for a few days and, when he was ready to be interviewed, he told the hospital psychiatrist, in a polite but vague manner, that he was now fine and all he’d needed was a few good nights’ good sleep. He din’t elaborate in any of his answers. Since he was more alert and interactive on the ward, and there wan’t anything in his behavior that suggested the presence of a psychotic or affect Dive illness, Fredric was told that he would be discharged from hospital.

Then, unexpectedly, on the planned day of his discharge, Fredric cut both his wrists with a penknife, causing deep cuts that required stitching. From then on, his behavior changed considerably: he became demanding and verbally abusive, telling nurses that no body cared about him, and that he would try to kill himself if they insisted on discharging him. It was another two months before he left the hospital. Despite this longer than ex pelted admission, the psychiatric team could’t reach a clear diagnosis, as most of the in terviews with Fredric were consumed by the management of his behavior on the ward. There were suggestions that he had suffered a drug-induced psychotic episode, and also a view, held mainly by the nursing team, that he had borderline personality disorder traits.

The transition to living with his parents again wan’t easy at first, but there were no ma jor behavioral upheavals either. When things were reasonably settled, Fredric and the community psychiatrist arranged to meet for a prolonged exploratory session, with the aim of clarifying his psychiatric diagnosis. Fredric himself had been demanding to know his diagnosis. Aware of the diagnostic challenges (i.e. psychosis versus personal ty disorder), the community psychiatrist chose to use the phenomenological approach by attempting to be free of bias, to assume a genuine stance of “presuppositionlessness,” to imagine what it was for Fredric to be himself at that point in time, and to fully empathize with his current existence.

The session started well, with Fredric able to talk about some of those unusual expert Fences and beliefs he had before being admitted to hospital. As the clinical interaction pro Dressed, the psychiatrist became gradually aware of a certain emotional shallowness in the way Fredric interacted, and also his inability to bring any depth to his account of events. Such shallowness and poverty in the content of speech reminded the psychiatrist of patients who suffered from long-standing psychotic illness, but this could’t possibly be the case with Fredric, who only recently had been performing well academically at Uni varsity. Then, when he was talking about his plans for the future, Fredric unexpectedly became very tense and started saying “I’m good for nothing... I’m a waste of space... I hate my current existence... I despise this person I have become... please have the compassion to allow me to die.” From this point on, while getting increasingly distressed, all Fredric could do was to repeat the same sentences many times, looking fixedly at the floor, rocking his upper body back and forward, punching his head hard with his fists, not responding to any of verbal interventions, as if in a tunnel, detached from the world. After Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making unsuccessfully trying to use supportive interventions, the psychiatrist chose to be silent and waited until Fredric’s distress gradually dimmed.

On the basis of this assessment, the psychiatrist, together with her team, decided that it would be unproductive, and even cruel, to further attempt exploratory sessions with Fredric. No final diagnosis had been reached. In fact, in addition to the initial hypotheses of psychosis and personality disorder, possible negative syndrome symptoms, dissociative symptoms, and even autism spectrum disorder symptoms were considered. As a copse quince of this assessment, the awareness of the complexity of Fredric’s presentation in creased. Most importantly, it became clear that Fredric himself had only partial aware Bess of what was going on with him, and whatever awareness he had was the cause of considerable suffering.

The community clinical team very much appreciated the use of the phenomenological ap roach. They also decided that, while they would have to wait for firm psychiatric jag noses, all clinical effort should be, at least temporarily, directed at caring rather than cur ing interventions.

Conclusion The views and cases described above are based on our experience as psychiatrists work ing in busy inner city mental health services in London and therefore hardly represent Dive of what goes on in other parts of the world, where phenomenological psychopatholo gy is hopefully more assiduously used to aid clinical decision-making. But it is still clear that it is very difficult to dislodge the inevitable alliance between time-restricted patient contact and symptom checklists. In busy wards and recovery-orientated community Olin ics, the use of phenomenology-based interviews will not be at the forefront of decisionmaking, and will not be learned by junior psychiatrists.

Would it help if phenomenological psychopathology became “manualized,” or if its usefulness were tested empirically against other competing approaches to clinical de cisionmaking? Certainly not. This would go completely against the whole point of the phenomenological approach, in its passionate defense of the need to keep in contact with a dimension of being human that all other approaches in medicine and psychiatry appear to have lost sight of. But can any approach satisfactorily embrace this human dimension? Pirandello’s character, the Father, sharing the same world as Jasper’s, quite miserably concluded that: But don’t you see that the whole trouble lies here. In words, words. Each one of us has within him a whole world of things, each one of us his own special world. And how can we ever come to an understanding if I put in the words I utter the sense and value of things as I see them; while you who listen to me must inevitably translate them according to the conception of things each one of you has within yourself. We think we understand each other but we never really do!

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Clinical Decision-Making (Pirandello 1921: 14)

In fact, paradoxically, it is perhaps exactly this stubborn insistence that we can and in deed must keep listening to and understanding our patients that will keep phenomenology cal psychopathology alive and perhaps even more and more essential for clinical deli ion-making in the future. PAGE_BREAK Smith G., Nicholson K., Fitch C., and Manors-Wallis L.. Background Briefing Paper by the Commission to review the provision of acute inpatient psychiatric care for adults in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. 1290275/CAAPC%20Background%20Briefing%20Paper.pdf Thornicroft G.. “Physical Health Disparities and Mental Illness: The Scandal of Premature Mortality.” British Journal of Psychiatry 199: 441–442.

Tondora J., Miller R., Lade M., and Davidson L.. Partnering for Recovery in Mental Health: A Practical Guide to Person-centered Planning. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.

Tversky A. and Kahneman D.. “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Bias es.” Science 185: 1124–1131.

Wiggins O. and Schwartz M.. “Phenomenology and psychopathology: in search of a method.” In G. Stanghellini and T. Fuchs (eating disorders.), One century of Karl Jasper’ General Psy chopathology, pp 16 26. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Eduardo Iacoponi Department of Psychosis Studies, King's College London Harvey Wickham Department of Psychosis Studies, King's College London Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis # Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis Federico Leon The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Jan 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords Psychoanalysis and phenomenological psychopathology mark the beginning of twentiethcentury psychiatry. They are two grand experiments against nineteenth-century neurology cal-criminological alienistics. Psychopathological experiences are not meaningless dis functions, they both state. But psychoanalysis and phenomenology immediately part ways. Freud’s psychoanalysis reconstructs psychiatry around the idea of the unconscious, phenomenological psychiatry around the idea of consciousness. Psychoanalysis believes in causes, and the first unconscious cause is what Freud called drive, with its adventures and misadventures. Husserl’s phenomenology believes in the transcendental, and what we call psychopathological experiences are nothing other than the fading, the displace Bent, the fragmentation of the constitutive power of the transcendental.

Keywords: Freud, Husserl, consciousness, unconscious, body, sex, cause, transcendental, interpretation, uninter pretable # The Twins of the Crisis AT the dawn of the twentieth century, the state of psychiatry as a science looked fragile and gloomy: the literature was growing, broad nosographic classifications were being de eloped, but psychiatry was still an imperfect neurology and a failed science. Research on the histopathological correlates of mental illness had not led to the desired results. As a consequence, in the absence of a reliable biological foundation for their discipline, psych artists remained at the margins of medical science. From a biological perspective—the only one psychiatry considered reliable—the possibility of curing mental illness appeared a distant and unlikely hope. This therapeutic impotence seemed to leave open only two possibilities: 1) a more or less coercive internment of patients in hospitals and asylums; 2) an accumulation of clinical descriptions that were, however, bound to remain abstract and sterile, and disconnected from therapeutic interventions, unless further interpreted.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis The twentieth century began, in psychiatry, with two grand experiments, both of which aimed at breaking through the impasse described above by questioning the jurisdiction of the natural sciences, or at least the idea of science promoted by the natural sciences of the time. These two experiments were psychoanalysis and phenomenological psy chopathology. The beginnings of psychoanalysis can be traced either to Freud and Brewer’s Studies on Hysteria or to Freud’s Interpretation of Dreams and Psychopathology of Everyday Life, while those of phenomenology and phenomena logical psychopathology can be traced to Husserl’s Logical Investigations, or Jasper’s General Psychopathology. What emerged from these works was a partic Alar cultural climate, a common atmosphere, in which different paths and trends con verged and sometimes intertwined, thereby shaping a new landscape. Wittgenstein would have detected some “family resemblances” between psychoanalysis and phenomenology cal psychopathology; indeed, both shared a number of characteristic features, and some minor and major themes resonated from one side of the field to the other. Similarities were as numerous as differences, and there were as many common battles as in Vernal conflicts. Psychoanalysis and phenomenological psychopathology appeared united in their dissatisfaction for their common background, but their path diverged as soon as it came down to their main goals. However, the way they constructed and interpreted the clinical descriptions of their most famous cases was profoundly different: while psychoan alytic narration focused on the unconscious, the psychopathological narration concentrate ed on consciousness.

The Discovery of the Unconscious With his Interpretation of Dreams, Freud had opened a window on the unconscious as it manifested itself in dreams and in the darkness and secrecy of night. However, it was his Psychopathology of Everyday Life that carried the most disturbing message: in this work, the darkness of night had also engulfed daylight. According to Freud, there was another kind of life that continually eluded and directed our waking life, sometimes overthrowing it. This could be seen in those fleeting and baffling experiences that Freud called “slips” or “faulty actions.” According to Freud, our consciousness is dominated—or continually nourished, if you will—by a meaning that has originated elsewhere. We are inhabited by a drive that is ours without being ours, by a knowledge that is in us without our knowing anything about it. All this unconscious content emerges through the gaps, the slips, and the intermittence of our consciousness. Husserl’s perspective, instead, was completely different. Phenomenology officially began with his Logical Investigations, in two volumes, which emphasized how the operations of consciousness lay at the core of the logical pro cedures and the validity of the objects studied by logicians. A few years earlier, in his Phi losophy of Arithmetic, Husserl had explored the territory of arithmetic, arguing that even in this case the mathematician’s “spiritual operations”—as he called them—lay at the ba sis of those mathematical entities we tend to regard as existing independently, irrespec Dive of the fact that someone contemplates them or not. According to Husserl, it is not be cause of the already-existing numbers that the mathematician can perform his or her op rations; rather, it is because of the mathematician’s operations and specific acts of con Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis sciousness that something like a number or a certain relationship between numbers can acquire its existence and objectivity.

On the one hand, therefore, psychoanalysis claimed that the unconscious was the cause of and the engine behind our seemingly autonomous conscious life. On the other, phenom Oenology presented consciousness as a relentless and inescapable meaning-generating mechanism. In the overall, psychoanalysis declared that our conscious life, literally, does not know what it does. In this sense, what we actually do and think would always be dif ferment—or other—from what we think we are doing and thinking. For this reason, Jacques Laban defined the unconscious as the “discourse of the Other.”

The Discovery of Consciousness Husserl’s phenomenology as a whole can be seen as a constantly modified and updated il lustration of the effectiveness of the operations of consciousness, of their imperceptible and tenacious capacity to shape meanings and to generate subjective experien ital contents, interpersonal and cultural expressions, and even the most impersonal scion tific objects. This way, phenomenology seems to ban the unconscious from its visual field as an unnecessary hypothesis; however, this exclusion is only a partial one. In fact, if every content of experience, every subjectively experienced emotion, and every scientific object is the result of the constitutive activity of consciousness, then phenomenology be comes a kind of archaeology: an archaeology of the underground operations of conscious Bess as a necessary premise of what appears on the surface of experience. Consciousness must be other from the contents it generates: if everything we experience is constituted by consciousness, then consciousness itself must by definition elude our experiential grasp. The act of consciousness, in other words, must be unconscious. Roughly, these were the same arguments advanced by the young Sartre in his Transcendence of the Ego. According to Sartre, the act of consciousness, which brings everything to con sciousness, could not be fully grasped and bring itself to consciousness: it could only replicate itself in the form of an unperceived mental act accompanying every object of re Election. However, there was more to the story. What the early Husserl had called con sciousness and described as an act or set of acts, had been by the late Husserl gradually and increasingly investigated in its depth, in its perceptual roots and in its continuity with bodily expressiveness and mobility. As a result, what for the early Husserl or Sartre was as an almost disembodied act, in the subsequent history of phenomenology gradually took on flesh and bones and was characterized also in terms of desire. This is particularly evi dent in Merleau-Monty’s Phenomenology of Perception and even more in his The Visible and the Invisible, where he explicitly connected his “phenomenology of car nality”—as he defined it to emphasize its progress with respect to Husserl’s phenomenal ogy of the body—with the Freudian perspective and the question of the unconscious. The guiding idea was still that of a constantly active, actual, and desiring unconscious always on the verge of breaking through the smooth and unsuspecting surface of consciousness. However, the texture of such act was no longer that of early phenomenology—vaguely Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis Fichtean, abstract, and asexual—but rather a “fleshy” one made of gestures and expires ions, sexuality, and creation.

Unconscious as Cause, Consciousness as Sur # face Yet the psychoanalytic unconscious was something else. Psychoanalysis was itself some thing like an archaeology: it also aimed to interpret the emerged land of conscious life through the exploration of a submerged and boundless continent. It was immediately structured as an art of listening to a patient, as a more or less wandering hermeneutics that gradually identified the traces of something else, of a latent but decisive and insist tent meaning. Psychoanalysis, however, interpreted this meaning as a trauma and as the main cause. It was a complex interplay between, on the one side, a procedure typical of the “sciences of the spirit” (as they were called at the time), based on interpretation, de ciphering, and the hermeneutics of suspicion, and, on the other, a method typical of the natural sciences, grounded on the search for a materially conceived cause.

Such cause was inscribed within a complex theory of trauma and temporality of the trauma, which can be traced primarily to Freud’s famous Clinical Case of the Wolf- Man. This man presumably had witnessed a traumatic event in his infancy, when, however, such an event could not have acquired a properly traumatizing meaning. The trauma, according to Freud, was therefore deposited in the child’s memory without tak ing on a precise significance. Only at a later time, when the child had developed a broad er knowledge of life, that insignificant event, so far dormant in the man’s permanently ac Dive integral and uncensored memory, was redefined as traumatic, censored by the rules of conscious life and thrown in the unconscious as a scene suppressed because unaccept able. In the Freudian and, more generally, psychoanalytic perspective, the causal role of the unconscious remained central, whether the cause was to be identified with the event itself or with its re-signification by means of a subsequent knowledge; in this sense, La can argued that what is properly traumatic is only language, symbols, or the culture at large. Such an idea of causality based on the notion of the unconscious had no place in phenomenology.

Karl Jasper wrote his General Psychopathology when he was a young psychiatrist with a vast psychopathological knowledge and a stronger passion for hermeneutics than for phe nomenology. Dilthey and Weber were his heroes. Only later dissociative identity disorder he discover Husserl’s works and reframe his investigation first in phenomenological terms, and then according to an increasingly autonomous existentialism. With his General Psychopathology Jasper wanted to rebuild psychopathology and rearrange its rich wealth of data in light of a tho ry of the understanding. Such theory was that of Dilthey’s and, in general, that of the nineteenthand twentieth-century “sciences of the spirit.” At the center of this approach stood Dilthey’s distinction between explanation ( Erklären ) and understanding ( Verstehen ), from which Jasper was directly influenced.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis According to this distinction, the natural sciences explain reality, and therefore under stand it on the basis of causal connections. The sciences of the spirit, on the other hand, understand reality, and therefore explain it on the basis of motivational connections. It is true that Jasper’s psychopathology, just like Freudian psychoanalysis, abandoned the or ganicism typical of the psychiatry of the time; however, we should not forget that it dissociative identity disorder so by bluntly dismissing the causal way of explanation and investigation typical of the Freudian approach. The point for Jasper was not to explain, but to explain and to under stand, namely to identify, in the psychic life of a subject and in the words of a patient who spoke about his or her suffering, not a root cause of what was happening on the surface, but a set of reasons that were connected or intertwined on the surface of his or her con scions life. According to this view, there was nothing else outside the acts of conscious Bess and the overall actuality of our conscious life. This surface simply had no reverse side, no thickness, no depth, and no past. As Nietzsche would say, this surface was all the depth and the mystery there was.

In the psychoanalytic perspective, the dialogical and interpretative moment was sup posed to lead to an archaeology of traumatic causes. In Jasper’s psychopathology, in stead, dialogue and interpretation culminated in a morphology of the acts of conscious Bess and in a reconstruction of the overall forms and modalities of organic relationship between the many contents of an experience or an existence, be it psychopathological or not. In Freud, the identification of the unconscious cause represented the turning point of the therapeutic treatment: ultimately, this could lead to the remission of the symptoms and to the patient’s recovery, at least as long as a recovery could be reached in the Freudian perspective.

In Jasper, on the contrary, the goal of the therapeutic dialogue was the dialogue itself, which fostered the therapist’s understanding of the psychopathological world of the pa taint and allowed him or her to share such understanding with the patient. Through this double movement, the dialogue opened the way for a recovery, to the extent that a similar term could be used within this perspective. On the one hand, the movement of under standing alleviated the experience of radical loneliness that went together with madness or, better, coincided with it. On the other hand, this understanding allowed the patient to take a stance toward an experience that was thought to be impossible to confront, this impossibility being another condition that, for Jasper, went together with madness or, better, coincided with it.

Once again, these were conflicting approaches. This contrast, however, should be seen in light of the fact that psychoanalysis and phenomenology seemed to share similar perspex Dives: the relationship between the conscious and the unconscious, the opposition be tween explanation and understanding, and the idea of hermeneutics as archaeology or morphology. However, the routes and strategies along which they came to adopt such perspectives were very different. Psychoanalysis was born out of Freud’s study of haste ria and developed through his constant focus on the world of neurosis: Anna O., Dora, Lit tle Hans, the Rat Man, perhaps even the aforementioned Wolf Man, who actually showed Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis signs that led others to hypothesize a more severe diagnosis. Phenomenological psy chopathology, instead, was born in the context of psychiatry and immediately identified psychosis as its favorite object of study. The very first cases studied by Jasper clearly be long to this area. A number of young women who had moved to the city from the German countryside and had been hired by upper-class families as nannies had committed what he called “nostalgic murders.” Soon after being hired, these women had developed a sense of rootlessness, of envy for the wealthy young mothers they were assisting, and of nostalgia for their own children whom they could not take care of. These feelings had gradually turned into hatred for the wealthy children, whom the nannies had eventually murdered. The great cases studied by Binswanger, such as those of Ellen West and Suzanne Urban, or by Wolfgang Blankenburg, such as that of Anne Rau, also belong to the area of psychosis.

The Virtues of Comprehension and the Virtues # of the Incomprehensible Given the centrality that Jasper assigned to the movement of understanding, his clear and resolute admission that primary delusions are un-understandable, that sooner or lat er the psychiatrist faced with a psychotic experience was bound to encounter something utterly incomprehensible might come as a shock. According to this view, in the mind of the patient there was an ideation, an affect, or a content, that had no place in the web of motivational connections that held his or her psychic life together. In short, the final mes sage of Jasper’s General Psychopathology was that the truly psychotic core of psychosis eluded any form of psychopathological understanding. However, the idea that everything was understandable and could be brought down to a common measure and a common sense had been precisely the fundamental assumption behind Jasper’s method of understanding in the first place. The ethical implications of this assumption are easy to make out. Originally, the idea that everything was understandable implied that nothing would have been excluded from the human dimension, so that no patient would have been subjected to the purely nosographic gaze of organicist psychiatry, to the desolation of psy chiatric institutions, and to the violence of the asylums. Not surprisingly, then, Jasper’s final admission appeared to many of his fervent followers as a premature and outrageous surrender. For the same reason, Ludwig Binswanger, from within the phenomenological movement, decided to reintroduce the idea of an integral comprehensibility of psy chopathological experience, at the cost of a profound reformulation of Jasper’s theory of understanding. To understand, for Binswanger, meant to identify the structures of lived experience rather than to penetrate the contents of subjective experience and their over all connections. It meant in particular to isolate the forms of spatiality and temporality typical of the experience of the patient. What was to emerge from a similar analysis were the patient’s characteristic modalities of organization of time or space, whose under standing, for Binswanger, depended on the identification of their genesis in a phenomena logical sense—and genesis, in his view, meant transcendental genesis.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis A phenomenology of time, according to Husserl, must conceive time as something “consti tooted”: the temporality of experience, the meaning of temporality, the meaningfulness of experience, and the directionality of existence are shaped by the operations of our con sciousness (see his On the Phenomenology of Consciousness of Internal Time, 1893–1917 ). While in the language of Husserl those operations were called “retention” and “proven son,” in that of Binswanger the transcendental genesis of a melancholic, manic, or schizo ophrenic temporality was linked to a “constitutional defect” —for example, to an excess of retention in the case of melancholic experience. In a sense, for a melancholic person, to experience a past that utterly swallows his or her sense of temporality is still a way to experience a certain temporality and still presuppose es a temporal synthesis and a sense of time, although one perceived as senseless. The constitution of meaning tends to be reduced to zero, Binswanger seemed to say, without ever being able to reach that point.

Throughout his life, Binswanger exchanged letters with Freud: he considered himself a disciple of his, read his writings continuously and passionately, and adopted many of his clinical suggestions in his daily practice (Freud-Binswanger, Briefwechsel 1908–1938, 1992. However, there was one aspect that made Binswanger always distrustful of Freud and psychoanalysis: the question of the drive. In the eyes of Binswanger, psychoanalysis was affected by an irreparably naturalistic tendency. In the Freudian doctrine of the dri ve, with its all too openly hydraulic notion of psychic energy and its blatantly materialistic and sexual coloring, Binswanger saw the re-emergence of the specter of organicism. This was really too much for the adepts of the sciences of the spirit to take and incorporate in their own perspective. Binswanger’s perspective certainly took inspiration from a phe nomenology that placed the body ( Lab ) at the center of its inquiry, but its purpose was to make it an essentially perceptive and expressive body, not a body affected by sexual dif Terence and dominated by the ungovernable force of pleasure.

Throughout his life, Binswanger exchanged letters with Freud: he considered himself a disciple of his, read his writings continuously and passionately, and adopted many of his clinical suggestions in his daily practice (Freud-Binswanger, Briefwechsel 1908–1938, 1992. However, there was one aspect that made Binswanger always distrustful of Freud and psychoanalysis: the question of the drive. In the eyes of Binswanger, psychoanalysis was affected by an irreparably naturalistic tendency. In the Freudian doctrine of the dri ve, with its all too openly hydraulic notion of psychic energy and its blatantly materialistic and sexual coloring, Binswanger saw the re-emergence of the specter of organicism. This was really too much for the adepts of the sciences of the spirit to take and incorporate in their own perspective. Binswanger’s perspective certainly took inspiration from a phe nomenology that placed the body ( Lab ) at the center of its inquiry, but its purpose was to make it an essentially perceptive and expressive body, not a body affected by sexual dif Terence and dominated by the ungovernable force of pleasure.

Freudian materialism, one might say in a formula, was intolerable for Binswanger be cause it reintroduced the specter of meaninglessness as the driving force behind mean ing: everything was pushed and moved by the drive, but the drive pushed simply because it pushed. As the proverbial rose, it bloomed simply because it bloomed. This idea marked a dividing line. Incidentally, this explains the fact that often a “Christian” psych try has found in phenomenological psychopathology a way out of organicist materialism, a way that also prevented it from falling into the arms of psychoanalysis, especially in its Freudian or Lacanian version. It is true that, from a phenomenological perspective, one could still argue that even the synthesis, or the living presence, from which the genesis of meaning stems, does not have a meaning: the mechanism that generates meaning cannot be understood in terms of meaning. It is also true that, on the basis of Heidegger’s xis tential analytic, one could still argue that the openness of being-toward-death, which makes our very existence possible and posits the meaning of its constitutive openness, is itself senseless, because it derives from a resolute decision, as Heidegger calls it, a deli ion that does not draw on anything other than itself. This was precisely Heidegger’s po Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis sition as announced first in Being and Time and then openly embraced in his later works.

Anti-humanist but Anti-naturalist Influenced by these Heideggerian ideas, Jacques Laban opted for what he called a “return to Freud,” a decision that disconcerted many of Freud’s followers. On the one hand, such a return was distrustful of Freud’s naturalism and tried to rewrite Freudian psychoanaly sis by freeing it from any organicist or positivist residue. It was a farewell to the Freudian model of psychic energy, to the hope that one day psychoanalytic discoveries could be retranslated in the language of psychobiology, and finally to the dream, if not a positivist at least an illusionistic one, that psychoanalytic treatment could finally reclaim the swamp lands of the unconscious and securely replace the darkness of the Id with the light of the Self.

On the other hand, Laban’s return to Freud was also distrustful of the phenomenological approach, since it regarded with suspicion those who planned to escape organicism and naturalism by embarking on a highly spiritualist journey. It was also a farewell to Husserl’s operations of consciousness, to the idea that the constitution of meaning was an inescapable threshold, and to the illusion that all meaning was understandable and all the apparent meaninglessness was still meaningful and therefore understandable. “We’d bet ter leave this mushy notion of understanding,” Laban wrote, to “Jasper and company” ( The Seminar of Jacques Laban, Book third, 1955–1956).

It is remarkable that Laban’s attack was directed at Jasper, who in fact had conceded that the core of every psychosis could not be fully understood. However, incomprehensi Ability was for Jasper a limit, a defeat, and not a major premise behind his method. On the contrary, to recognize this incomprehensibility and to establish a paradoxical relationship with this “elusive something” was for Laban not a defeat, but an ethical gesture, perhaps an indispensable one for those wishing to follow the ethics of psychoanalysis, as he would later call it. However, in order to understand Laban’s fundamental notion of incomprehensibility and the Heideggerian flavor of his return to Freud, it is necessary to take a short detour.

It is instructive that in the late aftermath of the Second World War Heidegger had to dis Dance himself from the two most important interpretations of his work: that advanced by his devoted disciple Binswanger, and, secondly, that propounded by a more autonomous but no less indebted follower such as Sartre. In the case of Binswanger, Heidegger’s ac causation may sound cryptic ( Zollikon Seminars ): what for Heidegger was to be taken in an ontological sense, Binswanger had taken in an Antic sense. What for Heideg ger was to be the subject of an ontology, in the hands of Binswanger had turned into an anthropology or a psychology. The radical nature of the investigation undertaken in Being and Time had been lost in the transition from the analytics of existence developed in Be ing and Time to the Daseinsanalyse developed in Binswanger’s Schizophrenia. Bin swinger took Heidegger’s ontological vocabulary and directly applied it to his patients, Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis thus contradicting one of the main efforts of Heidegger’s philosophy which was precisely oriented to avoid every reference to the dimension of subject and subjectivity, the idea of subject being for Heidegger one of the major documents of the nihilism of Modernity.

The same accusation of misunderstanding was directed to Sartre. Immediately after the war, Sartre had published a famous pamphlet entitled Existentialism is a Humanism. Heidegger had replied with his equally famous Letter on Humanism. This time, he had articulated his case with more clarity, and his accusation was one of human ism. What for Sartre was a resource and a solution, for Heidegger was part of the prob lem or even the problem itself. And if the problem was nihilism, as Heidegger claimed, humanism was part of nihilism, not an antidote to it. Precisely the assumption that man had a privileged point of view on Being and that our subjective consciousness was the lo cus or the creator of meaning was not a convincing antidote to the problem of nihilism. In fact, this assumption was for Heidegger the embodiment of nihilism, since it claimed that meaning should come from above or emanate from the innermost of a privileged interior ty, namely from an elsewhere that supposedly had the miraculous power to distill mean ing, or, as the phenomenologists put it, to “constitute” it. It is in the wake of such fund mental anti-humanism that Laban’s notion of incomprehensibility and in general his— both Heideggerian and structuralist—return to Freud must be understood.

In the context of the human sciences, the theme of the “death of man,” variously Bevel oped by the structuralists, expressed the same need that Heidegger had begun to voice in the field of philosophy at least since the 1930s. Meaning emerges by itself: experience does not need an underlying subject as its foundation, nor does it need a supervising consciousness or an unconscious that functions as another form of consciousness. If the unconscious plays a causal role, for Laban, this causality should be seen as almost mechanical and blind in nature, as a law that goner Utes certain effects not through a humanistic unconscious, but rather through a totally impersonal and mechanical one. Here lies the reason behind Laban’s constant appeal to Saussure’s structural linguistics and Levi-Strauss’s structural anthropology. All this al lowed Laban to reinterpret Freud by expunging from his perspective what still sounded too humanistic, psychological, romantic, or fictional.

For example, Freud roughly explained the Oedipus complex by saying that the child would like to be with his mother all the time so to enjoy her body and cuddles, but the fa her takes that magnificent toy away from him and forbids his essentially autoerotic sass faction. As a result, the child gradually learns to postpone immediate gratification, and to desire a mediated and symbolized form of pleasure—that is, he learns to desire tout court. Laban replaced these three characters—the child, the mother, and the father—with three pure functions. He called the mother the “thing,” the indistinct object of the orig nal enjoyment. The role of the father was taken by language. Rather than a man in flesh and blood, it is language that prevents the child (and in general the human animal) from remaining confined to his own environment and to a merely direct access to the world: thanks to the distance interposed by words, the child encounters the things of this world as filtered and transformed by language categories. As a consequence, the “thing”

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis is never present, and the desire is a desire for what the language has nullified once and for all: the subject emerges as a mere “slippage,” so to speak, an empty referent that lan gauge has interposed between the ghost of a forever lost object and the mirage of an ob Sect always propelled to the realm of other subjects and, more profoundly, to the desert land of language as the Other ( Seminar seventh ).

Here was Laban’s Freudianism: not a psychological sequence of events, not a family ro Dance, but a structure that revolved around itself, a machine that produced meaningful effects in a perfectly meaningless fashion. This way, the causal role of the unconscious was purified of both its organicist and spiritualistic overtones. Heidegger would perhaps have agreed, but would surely have been suspicious toward the mechanical and structure al aspect of Lacanianism, since for him technology was an expression of nihilism as much as humanism was. To be more precise, technology was for Heidegger just the other side of the privilege over nature assigned by humanism to man, a nature that was in turn re Educed to a usable and infinitely exploitable resource.

Field and Interpretation It is worth recalling, however, that later on a less mechanical and desolate version of the post-Freudian unconscious was also elaborated, one equally committed to emphasize its subject-less, anonymous, and diffused character. In this case too, this version emerged at the intersection of the Freudian legacy and the debate surrounding the legacy of a now widely post-Husserlian phenomenology. Ideas of this sort were developed in the wake of French post-Kleinianism. There were multiple factors behind this process: the Bremen Nous development of the Kleinian attention to the dynamics of transference and counter transference; the psychoanalytic development—pursued by analysts such as Andre Green and Pierre Fédida (cf. L’absence, 1978)—of certain phenomenological concepts such as “field” (Sartre) and, more importantly, “flesh” (Merleau-Monty); a fruitful reinterpretation of the thought of the late Wilfred Ion (cf. Ion, A Memoir of the Future ), which highlight ed themes and concepts such as those of “becoming” and “O.” One could argue that “O” becomes because it becomes, and that this ultimate root of being or doing, of ontology or ethics, is the target of both the theory and the practice of much of contemporary post- Freudian psychoanalytic thinking (cf. Ferry, The bi-personal Field ).

Finally, mention should be made of Paul Ricoeur, who, combining his training in phenom nology with a profound Christian sensibility, devoted one of his most important works to Freud: Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. The book, which was im Densely influential, contained already what was to be Ricoeur’s most mature theoretical proposal: an hermeneutics that saw in Freud a decisive model (but not the decisive one) and a stimulus to go beyond the psychoanalytic perspective. In fact, Ricoeur saw Freud an psychoanalysis as one of the most important expressions of what appeared to him as an overall tendency of contemporary thought, whose major representatives were Freud, Marx, and Nietzsche. With a formula destined to great fortune, Ricoeur baptized them “the three masters of suspicion.” Whether it was about the economic structure governing Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis a seemingly autonomous cultural superstructure (Marx), or the instinctual strum Cure rooted in early infancy and still affecting adult psychic life (Freud), or, finally, the will to power ruling, from its dark depths, entire epochs, and cultural formations (Nietzsche) —whatever the specific case, for Ricoeur, an entire philosophical movement emerged as a form of generalized hermeneutics. More precisely, this movement developed as a practice of systematic deciphering of the surface in the direction of a hidden and decisive depth: in other words, as a hermeneutics of suspicion grounded on an archaeology.

Freud, however, represented for Ricoeur also an incentive to take a further step. Ricoeur wanted to combine such an archaeology, which lay at the core of Freud’s whole enter rise, with what he called a teleology. Freud had shown that consciousness was not a master in its own mansion, but was driven and guided by what it dissociative identity disorder not know; Ricoeur, however, argued that consciousness itself was a powerful instance of re-signification, an original force that could be reduced to its archaeological roots. For Ricoeur, an existence was, therefore, something like a hermeneutics in action, both in the sense that it was a constant process of reinterpretation of a given content (archaeology), and a firm recovery and creation of such content—similarly to Jasper’s idea of freedom and responsibility, and also to a certain Lacanian sensibility for the logic of après-coup and re-signification (teleology).

Conclusion Phenomenological psychiatry and psychoanalysis both descend from the crisis of nine tenth-century psychiatry. Psychopathological experiences are not meaningless dysfunc sons. But on the meaning of their meaning, they immediately part ways. Phenomenology believes that sense is the transcendental constitution of objects and worlds, and that psy chopathological experiences are the misadventures of the constitutive power of transcend dental consciousness, down to its fading in the night of the world, down to psychotic frag mentation. Sense is sex, psychoanalysis thinks on the contrary, and if this definition may seem too brutal and outdated, we should recall that Laban in his last years repeatedly in Listed on this point. The fact is that other great psychoanalytic concepts belong to the reign of interpretation, therefore to the tradition of hermeneutic, which phenomenology itself rejoined after itsusserlian season. Drives on the contrary resist the hermeneutic, and exactly as they resist to interpretation, they push the subject within his constructions and within the discontents or the failures of his constructions. So phenomenology puts at the center man as the animal who constructs; psychoanalysis, man as the animal who de sires.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis Ion B.. A Memoir of the Future. London: Karnac. Blankenburg W., Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit. Ein Beitrag zur Psychopathologie symptomarmer Schizophrenien. Stuttgart: Eke Verlag.

Fédida P.. L’absence. Paris: Gallimard. Ferry A.. The Bi-personal Field. Experiences in Child-Analysis. London: Rutledge. Foucault M.. The Order of Things. An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. New York: Pantheon Books, 1994. Freud S.. Interpretation of Dreams, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sig Fund Freud, vols 5 and 6. London: Hogarth Press, 1953–. Freud S.. Psychopathology of Everyday Life, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 7. London: Hogarth Press, 1953–. Freud S.. Clinical Case of the Wolf-Man, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 17. London: Hogarth Press, 1953–. Freud S.. Analysis Terminable and Interminable, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 23. London: Hogarth Press, 1953–. Heidegger M.. Being and Time. Albany: SUNY Press, 2010. Heidegger M.. “Letter on Humanism.” In M. Heidegger, Basic Writings. London: Rutledge, 1977. Heidegger M.. On Time and Being. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002. Husserl E.. Philosophy of Arithmetic. Dordrecht: Stringer, 2003. Husserl E., On the Phenomenology of Consciousness of Internal Time. Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer, 1991. Husserl E.. Logical Investigations. London: Rutledge and K. Paul, 1970. Jasper K.. General Psychopathology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963. Jasper K.. Nietzsche. An Introduction to the Understanding of his Philosophical Activity. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997. Laban J., The Seminar of Jacques Laban. Book third. The Psychoses. New York: Norton & Co., 1997. Laban J., The Seminar of Jacques Laban. Book seventh. The Ethics of Psycho analysis. New York: Norton & Co., 1997.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis Ion B.. A Memoir of the Future. London: Karnac. Blankenburg W., Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit. Ein Beitrag zur Psychopathologie symptomarmer Schizophrenien. Stuttgart: Eke Verlag.

Fédida P.. L’absence. Paris: Gallimard. Ferry A.. The Bi-personal Field. Experiences in Child-Analysis. London: Rutledge. Foucault M.. The Order of Things. An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. New York: Pantheon Books, 1994. Freud S.. Interpretation of Dreams, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sig Fund Freud, vols 5 and 6. London: Hogarth Press, 1953–. Freud S.. Psychopathology of Everyday Life, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 7. London: Hogarth Press, 1953–. Freud S.. Clinical Case of the Wolf-Man, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 17. London: Hogarth Press, 1953–. Freud S.. Analysis Terminable and Interminable, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 23. London: Hogarth Press, 1953–. Heidegger M.. Being and Time. Albany: SUNY Press, 2010. Heidegger M.. “Letter on Humanism.” In M. Heidegger, Basic Writings. London: Rutledge, 1977. Heidegger M.. On Time and Being. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002. Husserl E.. Philosophy of Arithmetic. Dordrecht: Stringer, 2003. Husserl E., On the Phenomenology of Consciousness of Internal Time. Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer, 1991. Husserl E.. Logical Investigations. London: Rutledge and K. Paul, 1970. Jasper K.. General Psychopathology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963. Jasper K.. Nietzsche. An Introduction to the Understanding of his Philosophical Activity. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997. Laban J., The Seminar of Jacques Laban. Book third. The Psychoses. New York: Norton & Co., 1997. Laban J., The Seminar of Jacques Laban. Book seventh. The Ethics of Psycho analysis. New York: Norton & Co., 1997.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis Merleau-Monty M.. Phenomenology of Perception. London/ New York: Rutledge, 2012. Merleau-Monty M.. The Visible and the Invisible. Evanston: Northwestern Universe ty Press, 1968. Ricoeur P., Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970. Sartre J.-P.. The Transcendence of the Ego. An Existentialist Theory of Knowledge. New York: Hill&Wang, 1991. Sartre J.-P.. Existentialism is a Humanism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007.

Federico Leon Universityà deli Saudi di Milan, Dipartimento di Filosofia, Milan, Italy Phenomenological Psychopathology and Psychoanalysis Merleau-Monty M.. Phenomenology of Perception. London/ New York: Rutledge, 2012. Merleau-Monty M.. The Visible and the Invisible. Evanston: Northwestern Universe ty Press, 1968. Ricoeur P., Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970. Sartre J.-P.. The Transcendence of the Ego. An Existentialist Theory of Knowledge. New York: Hill&Wang, 1991. Sartre J.-P.. Existentialism is a Humanism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007.

Federico Leon Universityà deli Saudi di Milan, Dipartimento di Filosofia, Milan, Italy Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography # Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Anna Bortolan The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article explores the role of memoirs and autobiographical accounts of mental illness in phenomenological psychopathology. First, it argues that, due to the specific nature of phenomenology as a discipline, and despite the concerns which may be raised regarding the use of illness narratives, the examination of life stories is in this context a fundamen tal research tool. It is then suggested that the consideration of autobiographical stories can enhance our understanding of mental illness also because various forms of psych attic experience involve alterations of narrative self-understanding, and the case of de precision is discussed as an example. Finally, it is also suggested that narrativity is Pele ant to phenomenological psychopathology because autobiographical story-telling can contribute in various ways to the processes which are involved in the recovery from men tal illness.

Keywords: phenomenology, memoirs, autobiography, narratives, story-telling, psychopathology, recovery # Introduction MEMOIRS and autobiographical accounts of mental illness have been widely utilized in phenomenological psychopathology and, in particular, in the investigation of depression 1, mania, 2 schizophrenia, anorexia ner 3 Rosa, and borderline personality disorder. In this article I will provide a critical illustration of the different ways 4 in which self-narratives have been employed in this context and I will advance some sug gestions as to how the use of life stories could further enhance the phenomenological un derstanding of mental illness and the therapeutic process.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography # The Use of Memoirs and Autobiography in # Phenomenological Psychopathology The examination of first-person reports has long been a fundamental tool of phenomena logical research and this is dependent in the first place on the distinctive aim and method of phenomenology as a discipline. At the core of this theoretical framework is the attempt to discover the fundamental structures of subjectivity, that is, to identify the conditions of possibility and essential features of experiences of different kinds. Classical and contemporary phenomenologists have investigated the nature of var Nous forms of cognition and affectivity, for example, trying to determine the characteristics which make states such as judgments, emotions, and desires the par titular states they are. To do so, phenomenologists need to consider multiple instances of the phenomena at issue—for example, looking at different occurrences of what appears to be or is identified as an emotion—and single out the features which are invariant across 5 them. In this context, first-person testimonies are a very important resource, as they pro Aide a wealth of examples of the subjective states in question, and it is by comparing and contrasting them that significant advancements toward the identification of their core structure can be made.

However, it is also for reasons specific to the nature of psychopathological experience that first-person narratives are central to the work of phenomenologists. By looking at the various ways in which experience is altered or disrupted in psychopathology, the strum Cure of ordinary experience itself can indeed be more easily understood. As exemplified by the centrality of the analysis of neurological disorders in Merleau-Monty’s work, the observation of the various ways in which everyday experience can be disrupted sheds light on aspects of that experience which may normally go unnoticed. In ad Edition, the understanding of first-person experience which is facilitated by the examine son of illness narratives positively contributes to the ability of phenomenological psy chopathology, and psychiatry more broadly, to provide a comprehensive and faithful ac count of the phenomena under consideration. Theoretical investigations of mental illness may be rooted in academic and clinical practices in which a distance exists between en quivers, health-care professionals, and sufferers, and the relationship between them can be influenced by a number of sociocultural and economic dynamics which can contribute to the marginalization of the patients’ experience. For example, at a time in which neurobiological models of mental illness enjoy great popularity, more au thority may be attributed to clinicians and less attention and credit given to patients’ re ports. This might result in a more pronounced risk of misunderstanding the experiences that are investigated, potentially ignoring their specificity and the way in which they 6 might diverge from dominant models of the illness. In this context, the use of first-person narratives can help to prevent the development of partial and potentially dis Porting accounts, enhancing the degree of visibility and consideration which is given to the perspective of the patients and reducing the risk of them suffering various forms of “epistemic injustice”.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography The use of autobiographical materials and memoirs in the investigation of mental illness can nevertheless also be problematic in various respects. In this regard, one of the issues to which attention has been drawn concerns the influence that social and cultural factors can have on both narrative form and content (Madden 2008; Madden and Vargas 2013; Shapiro 2011: 69). Life stories are embedded in particular cultures and tend to conform to certain communicative and literary conventions, and this is the case also for first-person accounts of mental illness. Due to the wide diffusion of autopathogra hies, specific narrative rules and scripts are increasingly available to those who are willing to recount their psychiatric experience, and it is feared that this may negatively impact on the authenticity of these accounts.

In addition, specific concerns have been raised with regard to the reliability of autobio graphical and, in particular, illness narratives. First-person reports are of ten crafted after the events they describe have taken place, and such a temporal distance can be detrimental to the accuracy of what is reported. For example, Madden and Vargas (2013 ) argue that, due to the various ways in which the position of the author of an auto biographical narrative might differ from that of the protagonist, the narrated contents are fundamentally “indeterminate.” In particular, attention is drawn by Madden and Vargas to the fact that, when the life-story is constructed, the author might be in possession of in formation which was unknown to him in the past, or might judge or feel about his previ ous experiences in a different way. According to them, the existence of these multiple gaps—“epistemic,” “evaluative,” and “emotional”—may interfere with the recollection process, so that what is recounted is not simply remembered but also “co-constructed” in the process (2013: 103).

Another criticism which can be moved against the use of first-person narratives in psy chopathology has to do with the degree to which the experiences communicated in these narratives can be generalized. Galen Strawson has famously argued that not everybody is equally inclined to engage in narrative self-understanding, and that the lack of narrativization is not detrimental to the constitution and preservation of personal den sty over time. As claimed by Woods, such a position is extremely relevant to research in the medical humanities, as it prompts questions regarding the universality and desirabili ty of narrative practices related to the experience of illness (2011: 75–77). Due to a range of possible reasons, people may be “unwilling or unable” to report their experiences dis cursively (Brooke 2006: 310), and this may provide a reason to question the usefulness and appropriateness of drawing on autobiographical accounts to identify universal strum Cures of experience. Rather than being generalizable, these accounts could indeed just be representative of the experience of a particular group of individuals.

Criticisms regarding the authenticity, reliability, and generalizability of self-narratives would thus appear to challenge the claim that the examination of first-person accounts should play a fundamental role in phenomenological psychopathology. Such critic isms, however, can be responded to in various ways.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography In the first place, and with reference specifically to the concerns about the influence that narrative conventions can have on the authenticity of patients’ stories, it has been argued for instance that a self-narrative can faithfully describe one’s own experience even if it does so by abiding to certain narrative conventions (Borden 2013: 77; Shapiro 2011: 70). In addition, it may be the case that autobiographical stories can only exist as socially and culturally embedded. As observed by Pruner, “the tool kit of any culture is replete not on ly with a stock of canonical life narratives [... ], but with combinable formal constituents from which its members can construct their own life narratives” (2004: 694), and this a fundamental resource for the person who is willing to engage in story-telling. In other words, the availability of specific narrative scripts through which to express one’s own story, does not entail that the individual experiences which are related in accordance with those models are not genuine. On the contrary, the existence of specific narrative models may provide patients with the linguistic and conceptual scaffolding necessary to describe experiences which could otherwise be very difficult to report.

The criticisms concerning the reliability of autobiographical and in particular autopatho graphical narratives correctly identify factors and dynamics which have the potential to hinder the truthfulness of first-person accounts. However, there are various ways in which reliable and unreliable stories can be distinguished. In the first place, in order for it to be credible, a particular narrative needs to be not only internally consistent, but also coherent with other narratives and known facts about the narrator’s life, the context, and the type of experience which is being described. Secondly, life narratives are rarely con 7 strutted or rehearsed in isolation, thus meaning that narrators can be questioned by their audiences, and asked to clarify, refine, discard, or expand their accounts if need be. As such, it is arguable that a comprehensive assessment of narrative coherence and inter subjective validation can go a long way in reducing the indeterminacy of narrative con tents highlighted by Madden and Vargas.

The criticisms concerning the reliability of autobiographical and in particular autopatho graphical narratives correctly identify factors and dynamics which have the potential to hinder the truthfulness of first-person accounts. However, there are various ways in which reliable and unreliable stories can be distinguished. In the first place, in order for it to be credible, a particular narrative needs to be not only internally consistent, but also coherent with other narratives and known facts about the narrator’s life, the context, and the type of experience which is being described. Secondly, life narratives are rarely con 7 strutted or rehearsed in isolation, thus meaning that narrators can be questioned by their audiences, and asked to clarify, refine, discard, or expand their accounts if need be. As such, it is arguable that a comprehensive assessment of narrative coherence and inter subjective validation can go a long way in reducing the indeterminacy of narrative con tents highlighted by Madden and Vargas.

Finally, the concerns about the generalizability of illness narratives, and in particular Strawson’s conception of autobiographical narrativity as just one among various possible forms of self-understanding can be responded to in different ways. On the one hand, it could be claimed that by making it possible to conceive of ourselves as unitary in dividuals who develop over time, narratives indeed support a fundamental form of selfconsciousness. As such, rather than being an aspect of ordinary experience, disruptions 8 of autobiographical narrativity would be integral to various forms of psychopathology. On the other hand, even if Strawson is right in challenging the universality of narrative practices, it still needs to be acknowledged that autobiographical story-telling is for many people an important form of self-understanding. As such, the examination of life stories is still to be considered a valuable tool for the comprehension of a particular class of expert Fences, namely the ones undergone by people who construct and understand their identity through narrative means.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography # Disruptions of Narrativity in Mental Ill # Bess: The Case of Depression In the first section of this article I have argued that, despite the various difficulties that this might raise, the use of memoirs and autobiographical narratives is of cardinal imper Dance in phenomenological psychopathology. In this context, the relevance of first-person narratives depends also on the fact that various psychopathological disturbances consist in or are manifested through disruptions of narrative abilities. More specifically, a num ber of psychiatric illnesses have been argued to involve alterations of the “narrative self,” namely a particular form of selfhood to the constitution of which autobiographical storytelling is considered to be central.

At the core of many conceptions of what such a self amounts to is the idea that autobio graphical narratives make it possible for us to conceive of various parts of our life as joined together rather than as separate fragments. By establishing intelligible conned sons between different aspects of our experience, life stories portray our existence as characterized, at least to a certain extent, by order rather than chaos. Through story- 9 telling, life can be conceived as having unity and a specific “architecture,” namely as in 10 Solving events which are causally and meaningfully interwoven.

A very influential example of such a view, and one upon which contemporary phenomena logical accounts significantly draw, is Paul Ricoeur’s theory of narrative identity. This theory is based on the distinction between two forms of identity—identity as same Bess ( mêmeté ) and identity as selfhood ( ipséité )—and on a specific conception of the Bela tionship which exists between the two.

According to the notion of mêmeté, the identical is that which can be identified as the same over time because it undergoes little or no change. The notion of ipséité, on the con tarry, indicates a form of identity which is kept through change: the identical, from this perspective, is that which remains the same while mutating. Ricoeur argues that narrative ity is what makes it possible to mediate between these two forms of identity (1992: 148– 149). In his opinion, the construction of an autobiographical narrative is indeed what en bales the individual to create coherence and meaning across the variety of events and changes experienced in her life, a way to avoid dispersion and define a stable identity which is recognized as such by both the self and others.

In deep consonance with the insights put forward by Ricoeur, contemporary phenomenal ogists draw attention to the existence of a specific dimension of selfhood to the structure of which narrativity is fundamental. From this perspective, attention is drawn to the dy namic nature of the “narrative self,” which is seen as something that evolves over time and is constituted through a plurality of reflective, social, and linguistic processes ( Gal 11 lather and Zahavi 2012; Stanghellini 2004; Zahavi 2005).

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography It is with disruptions of this form of selfhood that the core of depression is often identified. Englebert and Stanghellini, for example, argue that it is the creative aspect of narrative identity that is compromised in depression (2015: 698). According to them, while the ability to recount one’s story remains intact in the illness, the capacity of the depressed persons to modify and innovate her self-understanding is impaired, thus mak ing it very difficult to effect change even when it would be beneficial to do so given the circumstances of one’s life.

The disturbances of narrative selfhood which characterize depression have also often been related to the specific alterations of Effective experience which mark the illness. In depression the experience of pleasure and other positive emotions is radically dimin shed, and this appears to be an integral aspect of the disruptions of narrative identity un dergone by the patients. For example, it has been maintained that due to the loss of emo tonal resonance, the life stories endorsed by the patients before the onset of the illness come to be experienced as inauthentic. In addition, Englebert and Stanghellini suggest that the loss of feeling hinders narrative self-understanding also because of the thwarting effect it has on motivation. Emotions are very powerful forces in driving our cognitive and practical activities and, in their opinion, it is because of the Effective flattening they experience that depressed patients are not motivated to creatively reshape their self-conception (2015: 693).

Depression, however, is marked not only by the impoverishment or disappearance of cer Cain emotions, but also by the emergence of affects which are rarely present in non-patio logical experience and it has been claimed that this might lead to the crafting of narra Dives which possess specific characteristics with respect to both their form and content (Bortolan 2017a: 81–87).

At the origin of this idea is the acknowledgment that emotions are fundamental to the constitution and selection of narrative content. As remarked by Hardcastle, it is because of their Effective connotations that some experiences are included in the stories we tell about ourselves while others are excluded. Emotions, in other words, “tag” certain events as significant and these are the ones which “make it into our stories” (2003: 354). In addition, emotions can shape the contents of our narratives not only by marking cer Cain events as significant or relevant for the purposes of our story-telling, but also by be coming narrative contents themselves.

Underlying the accounts of the narrative self discussed so far is the idea that integral to the processes through which we craft our life stories is the ability to take a position with regard to who we are and we want to be. Zahavi, for example, notices that a fundamental aspect of the development of narrative selfhood consists in the endorsement of specific values and beliefs, a process which shapes one’s “personal character or personality” (Za have 2007: 193). In a similar vein, Rosfort and Stanghellini (2009: 254) claim that person hood is dependent on the ability to take an “evaluative stance” toward one’s own expert Fences and to make decisions about what kind of person one aspires to be.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography It seems that in depression, due to the presence of particular moods, such position-taking ability is disrupted, thus further contributing to the disturbances of narrative self-under standing. Madden, for instance, has suggested that the moods experienced by the depressed person have distinct qualitative and quantitative features (2013: 97) which may hinder the patients’ “epistemic agency,” namely the ability to reflect on and submit their cognitive states to rational scrutiny. Madden acknowledges that moods have the power to shape our judgments and behaviors and that, in particular in the case of unipo lar and bipolar disorders, they are very resistant to change. As such, when a depressed person is in the grip of a negative mood, it is very difficult for her to distance her self from the thoughts and evaluations, such as “disparaging self-assessments” (2013: 84), which are congruent with those moods, and, as a result, her ability to critically as 12 chess her mental states may be weakened.

The Effective alterations which mark depression can thus affect the patient’s narrative self-understanding by impairing her ability to adequately evaluate herself, others, and features of the external world. As such, the alterations of affectivity and narrativity topi cal of the illness can also be ethically relevant, as they may significantly impact upon the 13 person’s moral knowledge and behavior.

Narratives and the Recovery Process As illustrated so far, the role played by narrative disturbances in mental illness has been a clear focus of research in phenomenological psychopathology. In particular, attention has been drawn to alterations of narrative selfhood and the various ways in which these are connected with disruptions of Effective experience. Affectivity and narrativity, however, are also significantly involved in the treatment and recovery processes, and in the follow ing I will provide an overview of some of the dynamics which are relevant in this context, suggesting some directions for further phenomenological investigation.

Narrativity contributes to emotional regulation in various ways and this is very relevant to the processes through which psychopathological disturbances can be managed and overcome. In the first place, engaging in story-telling activities can enhance the sense of being in control of one’s own experience. One reason why this is the case has to do with the fact that emotions are usually perceived as passive phe novena, something by which we are affected rather than states which we willfully trig ger. Even when we actively pursue the experience of a particular emotion, its eventual emergence is experienced in itself as being independent of our voluntary control. Be cause of this, especially when emotions are particularly intense, we might feel unable to control them. Due to a sense of powerlessness we might engage in fewer attempts to reg late the emotions, which can then acquire greater intensity and, in a circular way, fur her increase our feelings of passivity. Story-telling can contrast these dynamics by virtue of its being an active process: thinking or narrating a story is an intentional act and, as such, it enhances our sense of having a degree of control over our experiences. This in creased sense of control, in turn, inclines us to be more proactive in regulating our feel Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Dings, which results in less overwhelming emotions and in an increased sense of empower Bent. This is particularly relevant to the experience of physical and mental illness, as these may be marked by the presence of intense and disruptive emotions. In this context, as observed by Charon, “to find the words to contain the disorder and its attendant wor Dies gives shape to and control over the chaos of illness” (2001: 1898).

Narrativity can contribute to emotional regulation also because it allows us to put distressing affects “in perspective.” This is suggested, for example, by Angus and Greenberg (2011 ) in their conceptualization of “Emotion-Focused Therapy.” Within this approach, attention is drawn to the fact that through story-telling emotions can be con textualized, that is, they can be situated in a particular space and time, and interpreted in light of specific personal and relational dynamics. As such, narrativity makes it possible to circumscribe emotional reactions whose boundaries at the experiential level might be blurred and to give the person the sense that distressing emotions are episodes that can eventually be overcome. As remarked by Angus and Greenberg (2011: 70), by attributing to an emotion a “clear beginning, middle, and end” and organizing the events along an “unfolding plotline,” we can make the emotion itself not only more intelligible, but also more manageable.

In addition to the positive impact that it can have on emotional regulation, being involved in narrative activities inside and outside the therapeutic setting can contribute to the re covey process also in other ways. For example, being in contact with a plurality of real or fictional life stories may make it easier for the person to conceive of experiences which are precluded by the illness, and this in turn makes it more likely for these experiences to be undergone when the possibility arises. This dynamic reflects an aspect of the relation ship between language and affectivity more broadly, and has been investigated by Colo bets (2009 ) with reference specifically to the impact that emotion labels and classifica sons can have on the structure of the affects themselves.

Colombetti observes that language gives us the possibility to “condense” complex experiences in relatively simple expressions. By being so labeled, she argues, certain af Sects are made “accessible” to people, who thus become more aware of the existence of particular experiential possibilities and more likely to undergo the relevant emotions. Ac cording to Colombetti, an example of this is provided by the Japanese expression “ mono no aware,” which designates the “awareness of the transient nature of all things” (2009: 14 19). Colombetti notices that this particular experience appears to be referred to much more frequently in Japanese than, for example, in Italian poetry (where no single term ex sits for the word “aware”), and suggests that it is the existence of the word itself which determined the significance of the experience in Japanese culture (ibid.).

It is arguable that, similarly to what happens in the case of emotional labeling, by virtue of their being narrated, certain experiences and behaviors become more understandable and salient, and it is thus easier for those who engage with these narratives to conceive the events there represented as concrete possibilities.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography These dynamics are particularly relevant to psychiatric experience, as it has been claimed that disruptions of one’s sense of possibility are central to a number of psychopathology cal disturbances. For example, Radcliffe (2010 ) has shown that in depress ion the sense of what it is possible for one to achieve is deeply altered: for patients af feted by severe forms of the illness recovery is seen as just unattainable and the person’s distressing condition is perceived as insurmountable.

Given the power of narratives to shape the structure of emotions, modifying the 15 stories with which patients identify can have a significant effect on their experience. By being both passively and actively involved in story-telling, patients can imagine them selves in alternative roles, they can play parts which are different from the ones they usu ally embody, and, as result, become able to access emotions and behaviors which were precluded to them by the illness. These processes appear to reflect the dynamics around which also cognitive therapy revolves. According to this frame work, it is through the modification of one’s own beliefs and judgments that long-lasting Effective and experiential changes can be triggered, and narratives seem to be a particu Carly effective tool for the generation of these cognitive shifts, as they provide the context in which the person’s thoughts can be expressed, connected to each other, and negotiate ed.

Conclusion This article has provided an illustration of various ways in which the use of memoirs and autobiographical narratives is central to phenomenological psychopathology. First-person accounts of mental illness are for the phenomenologist a fundamental source of inform son about the essential structure of the experiences she investigates. In addition, they play a significant role in the attempt to avoid the construction of one-sided and potential ly distorting psychiatric models. However, the debate still seems to be open with regards to what would be the best way to structure, collect, and use first-person reports in a Blini 16 cal context, and this is an issue to which further research should be devoted. Furthermore, as shown in the second section of the article, alterations or the breakdown of narrative structures are often integral to psychopathological disturbances, and, as such, their consideration is something from which phenomenological accounts of psych attic experience cannot rescind. In the existing literature and in this article, attention has been devoted in particular to the narrative disruptions which mark depression, but the body of phenomenological research in this area could be fruitfully extended by exam Dining autobiographical narrativity in other forms of psychiatric and neurological illness. Finally, as highlighted in the last section, autobiographical story-telling is central also to the dynamics which are in play in therapeutic and recovery processes and further inquiry into this area appears to be a promising avenue for future research in phenomenology.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography # Acknowledgments Some of the research presented above was conducted in my position as an Irish Research Council Government of Ireland Postdoctoral Fellow, as an integral part of the project “The Phenomenology of Self-Esteem” [GOIPD/2016/555]. I thus wish to thank the Irish Re search Council for its support, as well as Matthew Brooke and Polo Fusar-Poi for very helpful comments on a previous version of the text. Bibliography American Psychiatric Association (American Psychiatric Association).. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. DSM-5, 5th edn. Arlington: American Psychiatric Association. Angus L. E. and Greenberg L. S.. Working with Narrative in Emotion-Focused Therapy. Changing Stories, Healing Lives. Washington: American Psychological Associa son. Beck A. T., Rush A. J., Shaw B. F., and Emery G.. Cognitive Therapy of Depression. New York: The Guilford Press. Ziegler P.. The Ethical Treatment of Depression. Autonomy through Psychotherapy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Binswanger L.. Schizophrenia. Pfullingen: Neske. Binswanger L.. Melancholia und Janie. Phänomenologische Studied. Pfullingen: Neske. Bortolan A. (2017a.) “Affectivity and Narrativity in Depression: A Phenomenological Study.” Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy 20: 77–88. Bortolan A. (2017b.) “Affectivity and Moral Experience: An Extended Phenomenological Account.” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 16: 471–490. Borden H.. “A Phenomenological Study of Anorexia Nervosa.” Philosophy, Psychic try, & Psychology 19: 227–241. Borden H.. A Phenomenological Study of Mania and Depression. Durham theses, Durham University. Available at Durham E-Theses Online: 9456/ (accessed August 6, 2017). Bowman G.. A Shape of My Own. London: Penguin Books. Brampton S.. Shoot the Damn Dog. A Memoir of Depression. London: Bloomsbury. Brooke M. R.. “Taxonomy and Ontology in Psychiatry: A Survey of Recent Liter Cure.” Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 13: 303–319.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Brute H.. The Golden Cage: The Enigma of Anorexia Nervosa. New York: Vintage Books. Pruner J.. “Life as Narrative.” Social Research 71: 691–710. Camel H. H.. “Illness, Phenomenology, and Philosophical Method.” Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics 34: 345–357. Charon R.. “Narrative Medicine: A Model for Empathy, Reflection, Profession, and Trust.” JAMA 286: 1897–1902. Colombetti G.. “What Language Does to Feelings.” Journal of Consciousness Stud ies 16: 4–26. Cooper R.. “What is Wrong with the DSM?” History of Psychiatry 15: 5–25. Englebert J. and Stanghellini G.. “La Janie et la Mélancolie Somme Crises de l’Identityé Narrative et de l’Intentionnalité.” L’Évolution Psychiatrique 80: 689–700. Frank A. W.. “Illness and Autobiographical Work: Dialogue as Narrative Destabi libation.” Qualitative Sociology 23: 135–156.

Fuchs T.. “Fragmented Selves: Temporality and Identity in Borderline Per Tonality Disorder.” Psychopathology 40: 379–387. Fuchs T.. “Depression, Intercorporeality and Interaffectivity.” Journal of Conscious Bess Studies 20: 219–238. Gallagher S. and Brøcited SøJensen J.. “Experimenting with Phenomenology.” Con sciousness and Cognition 15: 119–134. Gallagher S. and Zahavi D.. The Phenomenological Mind, 2nd edn. New York: Rutledge. Goldie P.. The Emotions: A Philosophical Exploration. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Goldie P.. The Mess Inside. Narrative, Emotion, and the Mind. Oxford: Oxford Uni varsity Press. Hardcastle fifth. G.. “Emotions and Narrative Selves.” Philosophy, Psychiatry & Psy chology 10: 353–355. Hawkins A. H.. “Pathography: Patient Narratives of Illness.” Western Journal of Medicine 171: 127–129. Husserl E.. Experience and Judgment: Investigations in a Genealogy of Logic, trans. J. S. Churchill and K. Ameriks. London: Rutledge and Began Paul.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Brute H.. The Golden Cage: The Enigma of Anorexia Nervosa. New York: Vintage Books. Pruner J.. “Life as Narrative.” Social Research 71: 691–710. Camel H. H.. “Illness, Phenomenology, and Philosophical Method.” Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics 34: 345–357. Charon R.. “Narrative Medicine: A Model for Empathy, Reflection, Profession, and Trust.” JAMA 286: 1897–1902. Colombetti G.. “What Language Does to Feelings.” Journal of Consciousness Stud ies 16: 4–26. Cooper R.. “What is Wrong with the DSM?” History of Psychiatry 15: 5–25. Englebert J. and Stanghellini G.. “La Janie et la Mélancolie Somme Crises de l’Identityé Narrative et de l’Intentionnalité.” L’Évolution Psychiatrique 80: 689–700. Frank A. W.. “Illness and Autobiographical Work: Dialogue as Narrative Destabi libation.” Qualitative Sociology 23: 135–156.

Fuchs T.. “Fragmented Selves: Temporality and Identity in Borderline Per Tonality Disorder.” Psychopathology 40: 379–387. Fuchs T.. “Depression, Intercorporeality and Interaffectivity.” Journal of Conscious Bess Studies 20: 219–238. Gallagher S. and Brøcited SøJensen J.. “Experimenting with Phenomenology.” Con sciousness and Cognition 15: 119–134. Gallagher S. and Zahavi D.. The Phenomenological Mind, 2nd edn. New York: Rutledge. Goldie P.. The Emotions: A Philosophical Exploration. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Goldie P.. The Mess Inside. Narrative, Emotion, and the Mind. Oxford: Oxford Uni varsity Press. Hardcastle fifth. G.. “Emotions and Narrative Selves.” Philosophy, Psychiatry & Psy chology 10: 353–355. Hawkins A. H.. “Pathography: Patient Narratives of Illness.” Western Journal of Medicine 171: 127–129. Husserl E.. Experience and Judgment: Investigations in a Genealogy of Logic, trans. J. S. Churchill and K. Ameriks. London: Rutledge and Began Paul.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Husserl E.. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book. General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology, trans. F. Kirsten. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Husserl E.. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. Second Book. Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution, trans. R. Roicewizy and A. Schuwer. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Kidd I. J. and Camel H.. “Epistemic Injustice and Illness.” Journal of Applied Phil's ophy 34: 172–190.

Lamarque P.. “On not Expecting Too Much from Narrative.” Mind & Language 19: 393–408.

Legrand D.. “Subjective and Physical Dimensions of Bodily Self-consciousness, and their Dis-integration in Anorexia Nervosa.” Neuropsychologia 48: 726–737.

Merleau-Monty M.. Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith. London: Rout ledge and Began Paul.

Paras J. and Henriksen M. G.. “Mysticism and Schizophrenia: A Phenomenology cal Exploration of the Structure of Consciousness in the Schizophrenia Spectrum Visor Hers.” Consciousness and Cognition 43: 75–88.

Pennebaker J. W. and Seagal J. D.. “Forming a Story: The Health Benefits of Narra Dive.” Journal of Clinical Psychology 55: 1243–1254.

Plath S.. The Bell Jar. London: Caber & Caber.

Potter N. N.. “Narrative Selves, Relations of Trust, and Bipolar Disorder.” Philoso phy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 20: 57–65.

Pugmire D.. Sound Sentiments: Integrity in the Emotions. Oxford: Oxford Universe ty Press.

Madden J.. “My Symptoms, Myself: Reading Mental Illness Memoirs for Identity Assumptions.” In H. Clark (ed.), Depression and Narrative: Telling the Dark, pp. 15–28. Albany: SUNY Press.

Madden J.. “The Self and Its Moods in Depression and Mania.” Journal of Con sciousness Studies 20: 80–102.

Madden J. and Vargas S.. “The Epistemological Value of Depression Memoirs: A Meta-analysis.” In K. W. M. Fulford, M. Davies, R. G. T. Gimps, G. Graham, J. Z. Saddler, G.

Stanghellini, and T. Thornton (eating disorders.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Psy chiatry, pp. 99–115. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Radcliffe M.. Feelings of Being. Phenomenology, Psychiatry and the Sense of Real ty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Radcliffe M.. “Depression, Guilt and Emotional Depth.” Inquiry: An Interdiscipli nary Journal of Philosophy 53: 602–626. Radcliffe M.. Experiences of Depression: A Study in Phenomenology. Oxford: Ox ford University Press. Ricoeur P.. Oneself as Another, trans. K. Blimey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Rosfort R. and Stanghellini G.. “The Person in Between Moods and Affects.” Phil's ophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 16: 251–266. Saks E.. The Center Cannot Hold. New York: Hyperion. Sass L. A.. The Paradoxes of Delusion: Wittgenstein, Schreber, and the Schizo phrenic Mind. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Schreber D. P.. Memoirs of My Nervous Illness, trans. I. Macalpine and R. A. Hunter. New York: New York Review of Books. Shapiro J.. “Illness Narratives: Reliability, Authenticity and the Empathic Witness.” Medical Humanities 37: 68–72. Solomon A.. The Noonday Demon. An Anatomy of Depression. London: Chatty & Hindus. Stanghellini G.. Disembodied Spirits and Reanimated Bodies: The Psychopathology of Common Sense. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Stanghellini G.. “Philosophical Resources for the Psychiatric Interview.” In K. W. M. Fulford, M. Davies, R. G. T. Gimps, G. Graham, J. Z. Saddler, G. Stanghellini, and T. Thornton (eating disorders.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry, pp. 321–356. Ox ford: Oxford University Press. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R.. “Borderline Depression. A Desperate Vitality.” Our nal of Consciousness Studies 20: 153–177. Stein E.. Philosophy of Psychology and the Humanities, trans. M. C. Baseheart and M. Sawicki. Washington: ICS Publications. Strawson G.. “Against Narrativity.” Ratio 17: 428–452. Styron W.. Darkness Visible. London: Vintage. Thompson T.. The Beast. A Reckoning with Depression. New York: Putnam. Woods A.. “The Limits of Narrative: Provocations for the Medical Humanities.” Medical Humanities 37: 73–78. Zahavi D.. Husserl’s Phenomenology. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Radcliffe M.. “Depression, Guilt and Emotional Depth.” Inquiry: An Interdiscipli nary Journal of Philosophy 53: 602–626. Radcliffe M.. Experiences of Depression: A Study in Phenomenology. Oxford: Ox ford University Press. Ricoeur P.. Oneself as Another, trans. K. Blimey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Rosfort R. and Stanghellini G.. “The Person in Between Moods and Affects.” Phil's ophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 16: 251–266. Saks E.. The Center Cannot Hold. New York: Hyperion. Sass L. A.. The Paradoxes of Delusion: Wittgenstein, Schreber, and the Schizo phrenic Mind. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Schreber D. P.. Memoirs of My Nervous Illness, trans. I. Macalpine and R. A. Hunter. New York: New York Review of Books. Shapiro J.. “Illness Narratives: Reliability, Authenticity and the Empathic Witness.” Medical Humanities 37: 68–72. Solomon A.. The Noonday Demon. An Anatomy of Depression. London: Chatty & Hindus. Stanghellini G.. Disembodied Spirits and Reanimated Bodies: The Psychopathology of Common Sense. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Stanghellini G.. “Philosophical Resources for the Psychiatric Interview.” In K. W. M. Fulford, M. Davies, R. G. T. Gimps, G. Graham, J. Z. Saddler, G. Stanghellini, and T. Thornton (eating disorders.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry, pp. 321–356. Ox ford: Oxford University Press. Stanghellini G. and Rosfort R.. “Borderline Depression. A Desperate Vitality.” Our nal of Consciousness Studies 20: 153–177. Stein E.. Philosophy of Psychology and the Humanities, trans. M. C. Baseheart and M. Sawicki. Washington: ICS Publications. Strawson G.. “Against Narrativity.” Ratio 17: 428–452. Styron W.. Darkness Visible. London: Vintage. Thompson T.. The Beast. A Reckoning with Depression. New York: Putnam. Woods A.. “The Limits of Narrative: Provocations for the Medical Humanities.” Medical Humanities 37: 73–78. Zahavi D.. Husserl’s Phenomenology. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Zahavi D.. Subjectivity and Selfhood. Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Zahavi D.. “Self and Other: The Limits of Narrative Understanding.” Royal Inst Cute of Philosophy Supplement 60: 179–202.

Notes:

1 ( ) Some of the memoirs used in this context are, e.g. Brampton, Plath, Solomon, Styron, and Thompson.

2 ( ) e.g. Schreber and Saks.

3 ( ) e.g. Brute and Bowman.

4 ( ) In this article I focus on autobiographical or life narratives, namely narratives which are about a real person’s own story, as opposed to narratives which have as their subject historical or fictional characters. Autobiographical narratives themselves can have a liter ary character and be in the form of published or unpublished memoirs, but in this work I consider as falling within this category also the stories about oneself that are simply told, or, as put by Goldie, “just thought through in narrative thinking” (2012: 2). As such, the notion of autobiographical or life narrative employed here includes both memoirs and verbal and written reports of various kinds (e.g. the ones provided in structured or un structured interviews, in response to questionnaires, and in personal communications). These accounts can cover more or less extended parts of one’s life: some regard events which take place in just a few minutes or hours, while others span days, months, or even an entire lifetime.

5 ( ) Integral to the phenomenological method is the use of “free variation”, namely a procedure which consists in imagining possible ways in which a certain phe nomenon could vary while remaining the same kind of phenomenon. As explained by Za have, “[s]Boner or later this imaginative variation will lead us to certain properties that cannot be varied, that is, changed and transgressed, without making the object cease to be the kind of object it is” (2003: 39). Through the use of this procedure the phenomenal gist can then disentangle the object’s contingent and essential features.

6 ( ) The structured model of interview favored by biological psychiatry provides an exam ple of this dynamic, since, due to its focus on determining the presence of particular symptoms, such model constrains the amount and type of diagnostically relevant inform son that can be communicated to the clinician.

7 ( ) For an account of the dialogical dimension of illness narratives see Frank.

8 ( ) This line of response to Strawson’s position will not be developed further in this arch cle. However, some of the insights presented in the second section of the text provide evi Phenomenological Psychopathology and Autobiography Fence in support of the idea that autobiographical story-telling is central to the develop Bent of non-pathological self-understanding.

9 ( ) I borrow this notion from Pugmire.

10 ( ) The idea that, in order for something to count as a narrative, meaningful relations must hold between the events which are narrated is defended by Goldie. However, also less robust accounts of what a narrative is have been put forward.

11 ( ) Phenomenological accounts argue in favor of the existence also of an experiential and pre-linguistic form of selfhood—the “minimal self”.

12 ( ) Disruptions of narrative self-understanding involving alterations of position-taking abilities have been claimed to be present also in borderline personality disorder and bipolar disorder.

13 ( ) For a defense of this idea see Ziegler and Bortolan (2017b).

14 ( ) Colombetti reports that the translation of “aware” is generally “pathos” or “sensitive ty,” while the meaning of the expression “mono no” is “of things” (2009: 19).

15 ( ) It must be noted that the fact that engaging in autobiographical story-telling can have positive psychological effects does not guarantee that the narratives are accurate or that the person will be willing to uphold them indefinitely. Due to the constructive nature of memory and narrativity, the life stories we tell may be questioned by others, or come to be doubted by ourselves at a later stage.

16 ( ) An important question in this regard has to do with the degree to which both Blini sans and patients should be trained in phenomenology and asked to apply the phenom nological method when soliciting, examining, and providing first-person testimonies. On this point, see e.g. Gallagher and Brøcited SøJensen.

Anna Bortolan School of Philosophy, University College Dublin Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psy chiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc Grant Gillette and Patrick Seniuk The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This article combines an evolutionary perspective with phenomenological philosophy of Merleau-Monty. Neuroscience addresses the way the brain connects individuals to do mains of adaptation, while Merleau-Monty’s philosophy of perception explores the way sense situates humans the world. In particular, his concept “the intentional arc” captures the basic structure of embodied mental life through purposeful action. The processes of “sedimentation” and the neuroscience of ontogeny offer a perspective on the develop Bent of cortical and subcortical neural circuits that are in to-and-fro communication with the lived body. This dynamic sheds light on the genesis of a psychological life, structures of attunement, and capacity for adaptation to the world, which are all vulnerable to dis Eruption in psychiatric disorder.

Keywords: neuroscience, Merleau-Monty, intentional arc, evolution, phenomenology # Introduction IN this article we reference common psychiatric disorders, with a particular eye toward depression and anxiety-related conditions (e.g. obsessive-compulsive disorder (obsessive-compulsive disorder)) to flesh out an affinity between the early neuroscience of Hughlings-Jackson and the existed ital-phenomenology of Merleau-Monty. We argue that the nature of some mental disorders is mischaracterized by neurobiological or psychological frameworks on the basis that they fail to capture the nuanced, Effective relation that is evinced by an embodied-subject in the world (including others). In mental disorder this Effective relation is susceptible to disturbance or “dis-integration,” such that the meaning-making body-subject finds herself no longer “in touch” with the world. Consequently, one no longer finds ( Befindlichkeit ) that one is an effective self-in-the-world. For far too long mental Visor Hers have been interpreted without an appreciation for the way in which a person incur Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc orates, structures, and is structured by purposeful striving in his or her particular mi lieu.

Moreover, psychiatry’s continued emphasis on pharmacological intervention neglects the brain as an active, engaged aspect of the body, which maintains healthy function through dynamic exchanges with the human life-world. Often, in explaining our psychological lives (as in propositional attitude psychology), the self is understood from the neck up, relying on the use of propositions, which are abstracted from speech and their neural substrates and it ignores the phenomenology of human experience, whereby the body-self is en aged in, and is intentionally spread out in the world, in both “normal” and pathological circumstances. We explore the way in which some mental disorders may be classified as Effective-disturbances in that they disclose a disruption to the intentional arc’s role in sustaining the dynamic interaction between body and world. This allows for a fruit ful two-way exchange whereby phenomenology, through a focus on being and doing, deepens neuroscience, and is itself enhanced by neuroscientific findings.

Hughlings-Jackson, Evolution, and Dissolution John Hughlings-Jackson (JHJ) linked higher mental life to the coordination and integration of sensorimotor functions in a highly evolved brain. He regarded the unique outcome of that integration, in a given human being, as the basis of subjectivity and the conscious self. Subjective activity drew on “impressions and movements of all parts of the body... in most complex... combinations... triply indirectly” ( Hughlings-Jackson 1878: 29) to organize a holistic organismic response to a context. The “triply indirectly” refers to the subsumption and moderation of reflexlike connections (whereby inputs mechanistically elicit stereotyped outputs) between body and world. Higher levels included wide sources of information: exteroceptive, interoceptive, and infra-cerebral, including Portico-cortical, Portico-subcortical, and top-down connections to moderate human behavior and thought. The result is an integrated whole-body attunement between an organism and its context, dynamically maintained by normal adaptive activity. This attunement transcends an im poverished and untenable input–output (causal/functional) approach to the way in which a human inhabits his or her “world”; it transcends the particular view that mental states arise internally as a stage of elaborating perceptual inputs for ultimate translation into external action.

JHJ’s understanding of human cognitive functions, including their neurological and psy chiatric manifestations, was deeply informed by evolutionary thinking and rested on the continuity between human mental life and simpler sensorimotor routines evident in ani Gals of all kinds. This sensorimotor engagement is also central in intersubjective relations and the inflection of behavior by the interpersonal resonance grounding experience of a “Self–other” dyadic system, a dynamic and responsive dad with an inherent dynamism and flow of movement. In the early stages of life, a mutual sensibility gives rise to a “syncratic sociability,” wherein the infant does not initially distinguish herself from others until “the objectification of the body in Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc tervenes to establish a sort of wall between me and the other: a partition... there is thus a correlative constitution of me and the other as two human beings amongst all oth ers” (1964: 141). The objectifying partition potentially alienates a human subject from a primarily interactive source of the self as one-among-others.

Despite JHJ’s predilection for sensorimotor descriptions, he rejected simple mechanistic (cause–effect) relationships between the nervous system and the mind, arguing that the relation should only be thought of as concomitance in which causal mechanisms—and the automaticity they seem to imply—are superseded so that the nervous system and mind are “the least automatic and the most imperfectly reflex centers” ( Hughlings-Jackson 1887: 34). Instead, they are “unifying centers... whereby the organism as a whole is ad Busted to the environment.” In this metaphysical commitment JHJ undercuts any form of Cartesian interactionism between mind and body as distinct entities, and under scores a bodily (or sensorimotor) basis for the elaboration of the psychological self as a kind of coordination or integration of the whole. Merleau-Monty’s convergent critique of both empiricist and intellectualism explanations of conscious experience is equally a reject son of the view that the mind is in the brain, or that the mind can be said to be in any thing at all, as a thing in itself. For Merleau-Monty, consciousness is the body being sub jective in its relations within itself and to the world; the mind is not a command center re caving input, which is then interiorized, reorganized, represented, and expressed as out put via the nervous system’s motor network. The body is not a locus of predictable behave Tors causally elicited by stimuli alongside which representations have a quasi-ideal or abstract existence: “A behavior [sketches] a certain manner of dealing with the world” (2012: 333) and inherently constitutes intelligence in that verbal articulation is seamlessly woven into all behavior and not merely into a distinct realm of “outputs.”

This straightforward, but nuanced view interweaves human motivations into our practical relation to world, a relation in which the world solicits or makes demands upon the body, solicitations calling for embodied responses that constitute ourselves as intentional be Dings and the site from which our intentional threads reach out toward the world. Mer lo-Monty critiques psychological frameworks that invoke linear causal/ mechanistic ex plantations to make sense of human motivation, stating that the psychologist, as ostensi ble scientist, “was himself, in principle, that very fact that he was investigating. He was in fact this very representation of the body, this magical experience that he was now ap roaching with such indifference; he lived it at the same time he thought about it” (Mer lo-Monty 2012: 98; emphasis original). He thus rejects intentionality as an objectifying representation or stance toward ourselves as objects with certain properties and locates it in our dealings with things according to praxis, techniques, and self-delineating projects.

This straightforward, but nuanced view interweaves human motivations into our practical relation to world, a relation in which the world solicits or makes demands upon the body, solicitations calling for embodied responses that constitute ourselves as intentional be Dings and the site from which our intentional threads reach out toward the world. Mer lo-Monty critiques psychological frameworks that invoke linear causal/ mechanistic ex plantations to make sense of human motivation, stating that the psychologist, as ostensi ble scientist, “was himself, in principle, that very fact that he was investigating. He was in fact this very representation of the body, this magical experience that he was now ap roaching with such indifference; he lived it at the same time he thought about it” (Mer lo-Monty 2012: 98; emphasis original). He thus rejects intentionality as an objectifying representation or stance toward ourselves as objects with certain properties and locates it in our dealings with things according to praxis, techniques, and self-delineating projects.

The affinity between the two thinkers is a vision of the human subject as a responsive, and engaged agent, who is coupled to her situation, and it rejects a theory in which sen Cory input data is translated into mental content and used to structure motor output (which Susan Hurley calls the cognitive sandwich model of cognition).

Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc Their work also prefigures theories of embodied cognition, enactivism, and dynamical systems theories of brain function, offering tools for a more robust and neurally realistic characterization of mental disorders than those found in psychiatry’s Diagnostic and Sta tistical Manual, 5th edition (DSM-5). More importantly, JHJ and Merleau-Monty appreciate that conscious experience cannot be seen in representational or computational terms and that human subjectivity is holistic and fully engaged with a complex human world, fea Cures of which psychiatry’s operationalized approach to diagnosis and underlying patholo gy often lose sight. In any situation, the body-subject necessarily engages the regions of perception, affect, cognitive-linguistic function, and motility in a unified, but appropriate ly distributed way, such that the demands of the situation are coped with skillfully and fit him or her for social life.

In the DSM-5, we find that one of the many criteria for depression is that it be clinically significant, a state that may be characterized precisely as an inability to no longer manage or cope with one’s Effective state in normal social life. However, the model upon which depression (and mental disorder in general) is conceptualized, is often parch toned along lines of functional and impersonal subsystems alienated from dynamic hu man functioning and it becomes problematic, largely because this dynamic functioning is (improperly) conceived of in relation to an internal or antecedent sets of causes which can go awry and may possibly be corrected.

JHJ claims that human bodies connect to the world according to “the latest developed and most elaborate part of a sensorimotor mechanism” ( Hughlings-Jackson 1887: 36). Mer lo-Monty uses different terms and posits that this connection is a series of “intentional threads” (2012: 132) linking us to the world. Through them we establish a grip on our world where the senses and our active responses are coalesced (or gathered) under what he calls the “intentional arc” (2012: 137). Subjectivity and consciousness are often used interchangeably to capture an appreciation of the uniqueness of our human presence in the world as coordinated intentional beings. For JHJ, human subjectivity and conscious Bess are analyzed in terms of four functions: memory, reason, emotion, and will which we can approach in terms of a combination of bodily responses and “propositionising.” JHJ claims that human bodies connect to the world according to “the latest developed and most elaborate part of a sensorimotor mechanism” ( Hughlings-Jackson 1887: 36). Mer lo-Monty uses different terms and posits that this connection is a series of “intentional threads” (2012: 132) linking us to the world. Through them we establish a grip on our world where the senses and our active responses are coalesced (or gathered) under what he calls the “intentional arc” (2012: 137). Subjectivity and consciousness are often used interchangeably to capture an appreciation of the uniqueness of our human presence in the world as coordinated intentional beings. For JHJ, human subjectivity and conscious Bess are analyzed in terms of four functions: memory, reason, emotion, and will which we can approach in terms of a combination of bodily responses and “propositionising.”

JHJ’s analysis is deepened when we explore the idea of muscle memory, the role of bodily reactions in emotion, and the role of propositions in reasoning and human cognition or Bering the incessant activity that a normal human being evinces. Propositions, central to the analysis of thought and language, lift human thought beyond the constraints on our animal cousins where intentionality just is clever means-end (or adaptive) activity. Promo sitions are abstractions from sentences about states of affairs in the world —“facts” ( Wittgenstein 1975: § 1.11)—and are apprehended so as to be communicable to others (Foucault 2008: 34) and assessable as either true or false (Free 1977: 4–5). But even sentence structure is closely tied to the neural correlates of episodes of perception and movement as discrete human acts in a domain of activity. Words in sen Fences denote explicit contents of deeds attributable to only highly specialized and con strained kinds of action where identifiable objects and modes of acting can be discerned. In a similar way, we find that Merleau-Monty’s cognitive-linguistic region/dimension res Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc Donates with the “specialized” deed of propositional use so that, for Merleau-Monty, not on ly is action primarily—and for the most part—initiated non-conceptually, but cognition it self is not a privileged plane of existence. Instead cognition comes to the fore in limit situ Cations, where one’s sedimented capacities for situational coping cannot navigate or man age a novel or unfamiliar situation. JHJ’s four aspects of consciousness—memory, reason ing, emotion, and will—in fact converge with Merleau-Monty’s phenomenological analysis of four “existential” regions/dimensions: perceptual, cognitive-linguistic, Effective, and motility in analyzing embodied subjectivity.

Memory ought to be construed broadly rather than in terms of the popular stereotype of a video-like record of past events laid down as images in the brain and amenable to declaw Dative recovery. Merleau-Monty uses the term “sedimentation” (2012: 131) to convey a trace made by lived experience in a way that is more pliable, dynamic, and accommodate ing to situational ambiguity than declarative memory reports of episodes. Representation al memory, according to Merleau-Monty, favors certainty over ambiguity but sediment son allows for the quasi-stability of the traces in our neural nets that rest on quasi-stable but subtly modifiable strengths of association patterns within the whole. The “snap shot” view depicts past experience in propositional terms apt to be deliberated about and acted upon so as to lead to a definite judgment or action, an intellectualizing abstraction that sees agency as enacting propositions capturing determinate, content-laden phenomena. But that account does not adequately or satisfactorily mesh with the development of per ceptual, cognitive, and motor skills effectively linking us to our world in shifting ways. While an agent may recall ways in which a situation is similar to others, she can never give an explicit account of the infinite variety of similarities to and differences from other situations that may influence a response. By contrast, at the heart of sediment Cation is a dynamic practical connection with the world and a “primordial affectivity” that manifests our fundamentally purposeful existence.

We are never indifferent to the world ( Umwelt ), even when passive, so that “the essence of any feature of the world is... indissociable from the reaction it calls forth in us” (Smith 2007: 19). Perception is therefore infused by affect which in turn structures one’s possibilities for world-oriented action. It is continuously developed in ongoing antic ulations (or “laying down”), forming a series from our very first contact with the world up to and including the present, such that the multiple affinities and potential resonances of any given experience are temporally present, reflected in that sedimented history of situ National coping, the success of which, however, need not elicit a positive habit or dispose son. A neural structure incorporating that sedimentation is part of a more complex whole which must be integrated with other traces and translated into action on any given coca ion to produce behavior (or even a settled train of thought). In fact, psychopathologies resistant to change may draw rigidity from bodily incorporation of ineffective or poor situ National dealings in that habit creates disposition.

We are never indifferent to the world ( Umwelt ), even when passive, so that “the essence of any feature of the world is... indissociable from the reaction it calls forth in us” (Smith 2007: 19). Perception is therefore infused by affect which in turn structures one’s possibilities for world-oriented action. It is continuously developed in ongoing antic ulations (or “laying down”), forming a series from our very first contact with the world up to and including the present, such that the multiple affinities and potential resonances of any given experience are temporally present, reflected in that sedimented history of situ National coping, the success of which, however, need not elicit a positive habit or dispose son. A neural structure incorporating that sedimentation is part of a more complex whole which must be integrated with other traces and translated into action on any given coca ion to produce behavior (or even a settled train of thought). In fact, psychopathologies resistant to change may draw rigidity from bodily incorporation of ineffective or poor situ National dealings in that habit creates disposition.

Time is implicit in Husserl’s phenomenological analysis of cognition: re Mention (the effect of past encounters sufficiently like the present one) and protection (the way that one’s current active engagement affects the future) link present experience to Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc past events and the anticipation of what is to come by molding perceptuo-motor cycles. Cognition is best thought of as a reflection of integrated and dynamic ac tivity adapting the whole organism to a context rather than as an interposited domain of central processing between perception and action. Intentionality is therefore (essentially) perceptuo-motor activity arising in situations through sedimented traces activated as the agent is touched by the situation, moderated by other (possibly subtle) affordances and intelligently enacted into experience and action. Merleau-Monty re minds us that this integration is by a situated, symbolically aware, semiotic subject (1973: 50ff.) and that sedimentation creates structures embodying both retention and protection to encompass possibilities for the existential self. These arise from a human neural system as it melds bottom-up and top-down processes of neural strum Duration to enable the work of being-in-the-world-with-others. It therefore combines memory (reflecting sedimentation), will (the ability to give effect to thought), emotions evoked in us, and reasoning (our use of discursive abstract sons and connections to order experience and organize behavior).

Emotions, as we now recognize, build on resonance with others so they are inherently intersubjective and not just intrasubjective. As embodied integrated beings, we are shaped by forces acting within the discursive mi lieu of a primary social group (Freud 1986: 469) that shape human agents. We learn how to act in this milieu so that, as Nietzsche has it, “psychology is the developmental theory of the will to power” ( Nietzsche 1977: 35). Power, not cognition, is at the heart of this ac count, taking us via Foucault, directly to the body as an inscribed surface on which disc lines have effected a complex way of being and doing (Rabinow 1984: 56). Therefore dis course or reason incorporates the bottom-up and top-down effects of our human interact sons on our sensor-motor processes which move us in diverse ways and inflect our thoughts and attitudes. That holism needs to inform our conceptions of mental disorder.

Reasoning and its abstract propositional structure organizes our thoughtful active ity. Unambiguous communicability essential for reason and argument gives a subject ac Bess to a supra-individual mode of self-organization. For Kant, as for Aristotle, this is part of the activity of a natural and integrated whole—the embodied human being trained in judgment (or shaped by certain disciplines) in such a way as to potentiate wisdom and self-control in their inner and outer dealings with events (Kant 1978: 95). A neural focus implicates engaged, discursive, embodied, and multi-layered activity producing strum Cures attuned to a world and primarily linked to action (despite the privileging of cogni son in both rationalist and empiricist traditions). The neural correlates of self, and our ex Vernal relations to the world and others, rest on dynamic balanced activity that allows adaptive patterns to emerge. These dynamics are both bound up with, and affect, intentionality; they are discernibly altered in psychiatric disorders such that a subject’s grip on the world or her capacity affect them; they show the effects and require a kind of care only available if someone makes a space for recovery of equilibrium. A car ing provision of and welcome into a space apt for recovery is a kind of hospitality or con strained giving of themselves by those who care.

Emotions, as we now recognize, build on resonance with others so they are inherently intersubjective and not just intrasubjective. As embodied integrated beings, we are shaped by forces acting within the discursive mi lieu of a primary social group (Freud 1986: 469) that shape human agents. We learn how to act in this milieu so that, as Nietzsche has it, “psychology is the developmental theory of the will to power” ( Nietzsche 1977: 35). Power, not cognition, is at the heart of this ac count, taking us via Foucault, directly to the body as an inscribed surface on which disc lines have effected a complex way of being and doing (Rabinow 1984: 56). Therefore dis course or reason incorporates the bottom-up and top-down effects of our human interact sons on our sensor-motor processes which move us in diverse ways and inflect our thoughts and attitudes. That holism needs to inform our conceptions of mental disorder.

Reasoning and its abstract propositional structure organizes our thoughtful active ity. Unambiguous communicability essential for reason and argument gives a subject ac Bess to a supra-individual mode of self-organization. For Kant, as for Aristotle, this is part of the activity of a natural and integrated whole—the embodied human being trained in judgment (or shaped by certain disciplines) in such a way as to potentiate wisdom and self-control in their inner and outer dealings with events (Kant 1978: 95). A neural focus implicates engaged, discursive, embodied, and multi-layered activity producing strum Cures attuned to a world and primarily linked to action (despite the privileging of cogni son in both rationalist and empiricist traditions). The neural correlates of self, and our ex Vernal relations to the world and others, rest on dynamic balanced activity that allows adaptive patterns to emerge. These dynamics are both bound up with, and affect, intentionality; they are discernibly altered in psychiatric disorders such that a subject’s grip on the world or her capacity affect them; they show the effects and require a kind of care only available if someone makes a space for recovery of equilibrium. A car ing provision of and welcome into a space apt for recovery is a kind of hospitality or con strained giving of themselves by those who care.

Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc JHJ argues that our cognitive nature is grounded in neural functions elaborated from sen sorimotor interaction with the world as a human being exercises skills and enacted tech Piques of coping within his or her ongoing engagement with the world. For Merleau-Monty, familiarity with certain forms of world-engagement are always imbued by Effective tonality (or salience), which tacitly structures subjectivity as a general, bodily style. Robot’s “Le moi c’est une coordination” ( Hughlings-Jackson 1887: 35), implicates active and holistic integration of multiple modes of acting and being affected by life (in Eluding affects implicit in symbolic and cultural realities) and it arises out of our being sit Bated in the world and with others.

Neural network theory and Inaction “within the net” of elaborated functions of the em bodied self is the correlate of demonstrable disorders of function discernible in the neu roimaging of self-circuits. These circuits capture our purposeful and holistic embodied be ing-in-the-world (hence Damasio’s “somatic markers”) generated by evolutionary phyloge ny and the distinctive ontogeny of human beings as intelligent, embodied, nodes of active ty in a discursive and social world. Contemporary approaches to neuroscience of consciousness, social cognition, and neuroethics support JHJ’s conception of mental disorder as a dissolution of highly evolved neural function (the basis of mental processes), and evokes the idea of fragmentation or splitting of the self central to understandings of psychiatry from the nineteenth and early twentieth century (evident in terms like “schizoid” and “schizophre nia” applied to mental disorder). But this strand of evidence and more recent work on cerebral synchrony and the delicate balances between self and other excitation patterns in Cortical Midlife Centers can be enlisted by those with an allegiance to the brain–body dualism that is contemporary Cartesian materialism. Losses of neural harmony or flow constitutive of a seamless psycho-somatic mode of being are interpreted Deductively by psychologies couched solely in terms of inner representational terms and can make invisi ble our grip on the world through the Effective interplay of action, perception, and inner sense.

Cognitive states and events, as conceived in empiricist and rationalist orientations often embed the “cognitive sandwich” view whereby perception is viewed as in put, and action as output, rather than the focus being on what our bodies are doing in the world as directly coupled to it in ways that are then inflected by speech (or dis course more generally). Bodily interaction and hands-on problem-solving (often informed by the “offline,” symbolic, and explicit representations) write into ourselves the praxis of a language, and that praxis connects us to others through situated and engaged activity so that the thinking, feeling, body-subject develops a neural shape whereby (even if “triply indirectly”) “the organism as a whole is adjusted to the environs Bent” ( Hughlings-Jackson 1887: 34). Such an active, integrated, psychosomatic, and in tentional view of mental function is basic to a phenomenological understanding of euro science and mental disorder.

Neural network theory and Inaction “within the net” of elaborated functions of the em bodied self is the correlate of demonstrable disorders of function discernible in the neu roimaging of self-circuits. These circuits capture our purposeful and holistic embodied be ing-in-the-world (hence Damasio’s “somatic markers”) generated by evolutionary phyloge ny and the distinctive ontogeny of human beings as intelligent, embodied, nodes of active ty in a discursive and social world. Contemporary approaches to neuroscience of consciousness, social cognition, and neuroethics support JHJ’s conception of mental disorder as a dissolution of highly evolved neural function (the basis of mental processes), and evokes the idea of fragmentation or splitting of the self central to understandings of psychiatry from the nineteenth and early twentieth century (evident in terms like “schizoid” and “schizophre nia” applied to mental disorder). But this strand of evidence and more recent work on cerebral synchrony and the delicate balances between self and other excitation patterns in Cortical Midlife Centers can be enlisted by those with an allegiance to the brain–body dualism that is contemporary Cartesian materialism. Losses of neural harmony or flow constitutive of a seamless psycho-somatic mode of being are interpreted Deductively by psychologies couched solely in terms of inner representational terms and can make invisi ble our grip on the world through the Effective interplay of action, perception, and inner sense.

Cognitive states and events, as conceived in empiricist and rationalist orientations often embed the “cognitive sandwich” view whereby perception is viewed as in put, and action as output, rather than the focus being on what our bodies are doing in the world as directly coupled to it in ways that are then inflected by speech (or dis course more generally). Bodily interaction and hands-on problem-solving (often informed by the “offline,” symbolic, and explicit representations) write into ourselves the praxis of a language, and that praxis connects us to others through situated and engaged activity so that the thinking, feeling, body-subject develops a neural shape whereby (even if “triply indirectly”) “the organism as a whole is adjusted to the environs Bent” ( Hughlings-Jackson 1887: 34). Such an active, integrated, psychosomatic, and in tentional view of mental function is basic to a phenomenological understanding of euro science and mental disorder.

Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc # Evolution, Dissolution, and Being-in-the-World- # with-Others The thought that various mental disorders are different dissolution of evolved neural function in the human life-world, lays bare the ethological complexity of embodiment and mental disorders. We all function more or less adequately in the world in terms of animal adaptation as creatures with, a more or less, unified mode of cognition (Kant 1978/: 113). Kant was somewhat prescient insofar as he understood the “insane” to live in a subjective, inner world—perhaps fragmented—neither properly in touch with the Umvelt nor with others. An experience of alienation from place, from the shared and com municable embodied experience that most of us indwell (Kant 2012: 113) is, in phenom nological terms, an exclusion from a shared world in which one is able to present oneself familiarly, normally reflected in the very capacity to live, move, and enact one’s being with ease. But, Kant overestimates the extent to which one retains his or her sense of un derstanding when one cannot act in a “real” world, a background upon which the bodysubject, depending on the severity of the disorder, is no longer able “to reckon with the possible” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: 112; empashis original).

Both JHJ and Freud echo these Kantian and phenomenological themes as they distinguish mental disorder from disturbances of the neural function required for ba sic organismic integrity, at what we might call, an “animal” level. That primitive “fitness,” which for Aristotle is part of first nature, can go awry at a more complex level when the world around one and one’s own body, are “triply indirectly represented” ( Hughlings- Jackson 1887: 32) with the aid of speech so that life incorporates the “collective reason of humankind” ( Kant, 2012: 136). Being distanced from direct sensorimotor input arises from questioning the world within our ways of dealing with each other and incorporates wider symbolic information and so provides another joint at which subjectivity may be come disrupted. Tomasello, discussing the complex social and semantic competencies mastered in human ontogeny, clearly identifies the multiperspectival character of the ob jective-reflective, normative domain that we construct to do this, which nevertheless re mains tied to the actual sensor-motor, cooperative, and communicative activity that makes it possible. The skills required to cope with that milieu relate our activity to Inn or sense (Free, Husserl, Merleau-Monty, and Levinas) within the symbolic order rather than merely Bedeutung or reference. Whereas the latter is often analyzed in terms of causal/biological relations, or in terms of a natural or primitive information link between the thinker and the world (Evans 1982), Merleau-Monty follows filo sophical logic (Free) and early phenomenology (particularly Husserl) by analyzing Inn as resting on our language-related dealings with the world, both individual and collective, and therefore implicates bodily expressions underpinning the words and sentences we use to make sense of ourselves. The body, as a locus for the expression of self, thus has profound implications for embodiment and mental disorder that cannot be exclusively linked to but that profoundly affect inner representations (in the mode of some philoso phy of mind).

Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc Consider, for instance, a psychotic person who speaks articulately but what he or she says has “disordered thought form and content” such that he or she assigns quite idiosyncratic content to life events and weaves them together in strange combinations. There may be a superficial coherence, but the speech can seem to have little or no sense in terms of act al dealings with a context (as in the dissociation between thought and life in Dotard’s 1 delusion— I am dead ). Here we encounter instances of unusual Effective-cognitive modes of self-integration (I feel dead; I am not really part of the world; I do not belong here; I feel as if somebody is putting thoughts into my head). In other syndromes we also ob serve Effectively disordered self-location among others (I am being watched by the secret service; my wife has been replaced by an importer), as well as Effectively enlarged selfevaluation (I have committed the unforgivable sin; I am rotting away inside and it won’t be long before it is evident to all). Northoff discusses hallucinations—quasi-sensory exp riences (there are voices that speak to me) as imbalances between external arising and self-arising modes of neural processing that wrongly locate sensory content and abstract it from lived-bodily engagement in idiosyncratic ways. In such cases symbolism and ab traction is read into an actual interaction with the world, used to shape re-re-represent son and confounds the ability of the subjective body to get on with life. A human lifeworld affected in this way becomes full of contradictions and impasses from the mismatch between self-understanding and the techniques of coping with situated human life. The often quite articulate use of words, in addition to the performance of many ordinary ac sons in psychosis, nevertheless illustrates a high level of sensorimotor coordination that is impossible in neurological disorders such as dyskinesia, dysarthria, or dysphagia.

However, the bodily attunement required for making sense of the world through thetic acts of positing and acting in light of an intelligently negotiated and shared symbolic real ity is impaired. Cultural adaptation, and reason-responsive praxis are therefore severely affected by an inability to engage in basic, often taken-for-granted, situations non-reflex Lively, in a familiar way, and unproblematically. The inhabited world and the experience of self therefore become problematized in possibly unlivable ways. Merleau-Monty holds that a hallucination is not a perception per se, but rather “reproduces the manner in which these realities affect me in my sentient or my linguistic being” (2012: 374). Similar to the Kantian formulation of a private world we noted earlier, Merleau-Monty contends that the hallucination, though experienced within a common world, is not of the world: “it takes place in the individual ‘landscape’... in order to carve out a private world within the common world, and always runs into the transcendence of time” (2012: 357–358). On the other hand, in depression, self-directed preoccupation and negative feelings may be exacerbated through hyperreflexivity on account of the body’s inability to go forward, to “decide” or act, a state arising from a change in the body’s ability to attune to af fictive world salience and respond. The perceptual “plenitude” or apodictic certainly of the world remains normal, yet the things of the world no longer affect us in the way char acteristic of unreflective and concernful action. The inability to be solicited by the world is equally true of interpersonal relations which, in depression, quite often go awry; Mimi Carly, in obsessive-compulsive behavior, repeated hand-washing or rituals exemplify a “pathological” misdirecting thematization of intentionality that disrupts a normally seam Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc Consider, for instance, a psychotic person who speaks articulately but what he or she says has “disordered thought form and content” such that he or she assigns quite idiosyncratic content to life events and weaves them together in strange combinations. There may be a superficial coherence, but the speech can seem to have little or no sense in terms of act al dealings with a context (as in the dissociation between thought and life in Dotard’s 1 delusion— I am dead ). Here we encounter instances of unusual Effective-cognitive modes of self-integration (I feel dead; I am not really part of the world; I do not belong here; I feel as if somebody is putting thoughts into my head). In other syndromes we also ob serve Effectively disordered self-location among others (I am being watched by the secret service; my wife has been replaced by an importer), as well as Effectively enlarged selfevaluation (I have committed the unforgivable sin; I am rotting away inside and it won’t be long before it is evident to all). Northoff discusses hallucinations—quasi-sensory exp riences (there are voices that speak to me) as imbalances between external arising and self-arising modes of neural processing that wrongly locate sensory content and abstract it from lived-bodily engagement in idiosyncratic ways. In such cases symbolism and ab traction is read into an actual interaction with the world, used to shape re-re-represent son and confounds the ability of the subjective body to get on with life. A human lifeworld affected in this way becomes full of contradictions and impasses from the mismatch between self-understanding and the techniques of coping with situated human life. The often quite articulate use of words, in addition to the performance of many ordinary ac sons in psychosis, nevertheless illustrates a high level of sensorimotor coordination that is impossible in neurological disorders such as dyskinesia, dysarthria, or dysphagia.

However, the bodily attunement required for making sense of the world through thetic acts of positing and acting in light of an intelligently negotiated and shared symbolic real ity is impaired. Cultural adaptation, and reason-responsive praxis are therefore severely affected by an inability to engage in basic, often taken-for-granted, situations non-reflex Lively, in a familiar way, and unproblematically. The inhabited world and the experience of self therefore become problematized in possibly unlivable ways. Merleau-Monty holds that a hallucination is not a perception per se, but rather “reproduces the manner in which these realities affect me in my sentient or my linguistic being” (2012: 374). Similar to the Kantian formulation of a private world we noted earlier, Merleau-Monty contends that the hallucination, though experienced within a common world, is not of the world: “it takes place in the individual ‘landscape’... in order to carve out a private world within the common world, and always runs into the transcendence of time” (2012: 357–358). On the other hand, in depression, self-directed preoccupation and negative feelings may be exacerbated through hyperreflexivity on account of the body’s inability to go forward, to “decide” or act, a state arising from a change in the body’s ability to attune to af fictive world salience and respond. The perceptual “plenitude” or apodictic certainly of the world remains normal, yet the things of the world no longer affect us in the way char acteristic of unreflective and concernful action. The inability to be solicited by the world is equally true of interpersonal relations which, in depression, quite often go awry; Mimi Carly, in obsessive-compulsive behavior, repeated hand-washing or rituals exemplify a “pathological” misdirecting thematization of intentionality that disrupts a normally seam Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc less, dynamic, and good-enough engagement with the world. Having said that, in obsessive-compulsive disorder (as well as in cases of schizophrenia), while a sense of owning some intentions rather than others is acknowledged, there are significant neural disruptions in self-function, such that the willing of the act is not experienced as one’s own. Here the organic fusion of meaning and bodily activity, nor ally integrated and holistic, is fragmented. Such disintegration is not a breakdown in cognition or beliefs but in the whole organism’s adjustment to an environment: “The nor mal subject,” writes Merleau-Monty, “does not revel in subjectivity, he flees from it, he is really in the world, he has a direct and naïve hold on time, whereas the hallucinating sub Sect makes use of being in the world in order to carve out a private world within a com mon world” (2012: 358).

The dissolution (JHJ) we call mental disorders disrupt the flow of sensorimotor activity and its re-re-representation (cognitive and social) exposing discontinuities not normally present. Thus a schizophrenic patient can speak words without the neurological impair Bents of dysphagia or dysarthria (apart, that is, from the extrapyramidal effects of med cations) but may show disorders of thought form and content, making it hard to under stand what is being said because thought is not in its normally seamless, dynamic, selfcorrecting relation to a world shared with others; in a word, the story is unable to be in dwelt ( unheimlich ).

A very different disruption of psychosocial and neurocognitive functions is seen in a psy 2 chopath. Such a person can act and think coherently and relate in an apparently normal manner to others so that both integrated animal function and prepositionally directed so Dial function definitely remains intact. Such a person might plausibly seem—especially in their own eyes—to be quite clever. But the psychopath lacks an adequate Effective and comprehensive grasp of what matters to others so cannot be properly careful about inter acting with them. The failure is not to identify or in some (partial) sense comprehend the feelings of others, it is rather in being properly affected by these expert Fences and therefore to treat others only as means to self-regarding ends. Sincere hosp tality is lacking as there is no caring solicitude and self-giving to the other. This is a sig nificant consideration in forging sustainable human relations in our complex psycho-so cio-cultural world and normally moderates short-term, self-regarding, pay-off for actions. That dissolution of a fundamental ground of social intercourse distorts a person’s beingin-the-world-with-others because it disables sensitivity to the fact that we are all Area Cures who essentially cohabit with others in an objective-reflective-normative domain, and take up a web of relationships where “I am because you are and you are because we are... by virtue of an interconnectedness” where “consequences for both the individual and society... are important” ( Van Stamen 2011: 15). We are, in short, normally creatures shaped by a discursive mirror comprised of imperatives and demands and meant to shape us for being-with-others in ways good-enough for our shared life together (Laban 1977: 3, 106). This life is bodily and elaborated through the integration of sensor motor function to shape a whole organism adjustment to the world in relation to which The dissolution (JHJ) we call mental disorders disrupt the flow of sensorimotor activity and its re-re-representation (cognitive and social) exposing discontinuities not normally present. Thus a schizophrenic patient can speak words without the neurological impair Bents of dysphagia or dysarthria (apart, that is, from the extrapyramidal effects of med cations) but may show disorders of thought form and content, making it hard to under stand what is being said because thought is not in its normally seamless, dynamic, selfcorrecting relation to a world shared with others; in a word, the story is unable to be in dwelt ( unheimlich ).

A very different disruption of psychosocial and neurocognitive functions is seen in a psy 2 chopath. Such a person can act and think coherently and relate in an apparently normal manner to others so that both integrated animal function and prepositionally directed so Dial function definitely remains intact. Such a person might plausibly seem—especially in their own eyes—to be quite clever. But the psychopath lacks an adequate Effective and comprehensive grasp of what matters to others so cannot be properly careful about inter acting with them. The failure is not to identify or in some (partial) sense comprehend the feelings of others, it is rather in being properly affected by these expert Fences and therefore to treat others only as means to self-regarding ends. Sincere hosp tality is lacking as there is no caring solicitude and self-giving to the other. This is a sig nificant consideration in forging sustainable human relations in our complex psycho-so cio-cultural world and normally moderates short-term, self-regarding, pay-off for actions. That dissolution of a fundamental ground of social intercourse distorts a person’s beingin-the-world-with-others because it disables sensitivity to the fact that we are all Area Cures who essentially cohabit with others in an objective-reflective-normative domain, and take up a web of relationships where “I am because you are and you are because we are... by virtue of an interconnectedness” where “consequences for both the individual and society... are important” ( Van Stamen 2011: 15). We are, in short, normally creatures shaped by a discursive mirror comprised of imperatives and demands and meant to shape us for being-with-others in ways good-enough for our shared life together (Laban 1977: 3, 106). This life is bodily and elaborated through the integration of sensor motor function to shape a whole organism adjustment to the world in relation to which Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc explicit construction is an abstraction from that part of human life where we are en meshed in language games or discourse (a part that massively inflects the whole).

Effective disturbances commonly attributed to depression, schizophrenia, or personality disorders, arise within a slackened intentional arc, the function of which is to unite affect, perception, cognition, and motility such that the body is capable of answering, not only the world’s solicitation to do things, but also the call of interpersonal relationships. In his lengthy essay on developmental psychology, Merleau-Monty introduces the notion of syn critic sociability as a way to characterize our most basic childhood entwinement with oth ers, persisting as the basic ontological description of intersubjectivity that permeates adult life. “The state of union with another,” says Merleau-Monty, “the dispossession of me by the other, are thus not suppressed by the child’s arrival at the age of three years. They remain in other zones of adult life... what Piaget calls displacement ” (1964: 155). Our childhood (in)capacity to cope with certain interpersonal situations may be “overcome at a certain level, [they have] yet (and perhaps never will be) overcome at a higher lev el” (1964: 155). A mental disorder must be viewed through disturbed affectivity, a domain of existence that makes possible our fundamental relation to others, whether it be bodily or “psychological.” The skillful coping implicated in this relation is both sensorimotor and emotional (a touch here, a smile there). Hence, “the indistinction between me and the other does not inevitably reappear except in certain situations that for the adult are limit ing situations but are quite important in his life” ( Merleau-Monty 1964: 154).

Understanding Disorder through Neurophe # nomenology—A Reprise For human beings, the world is the background upon which a natural resonance Fermi antes our primary intersubjectivity that implicitly conditions all our development, including participation in discourse as beings of both flesh and word. Within this domain, the intentional arc traces the intelligent interaction whereby a human subject-agent is literally intention with the world of action according to distinct, but unified, domains of existence: “The intentional arc names the tight connection between body and world, such that, as the active body acquires skill,... ‘stored’, not as representations in the mind, but as dispositions to respond to the solicit sons of situations in the world” ( Dreyfus 2002: 367). The tightness of the intentional arc opens up for me a livable space, not geometrically defined and translatable into visual representations, but sensorimotor—disclosing my body’s relationship to itself and to situ Cations “pregnant with meaning,” perspectival entrees onto the world structured by my history of dealings with it. Ways of negotiating a particular bodily space are “sedimented” from my history so that my situated existence, as a body and its capaci ties internally organized by midlife structures in the brain, is the biology cal basis on which I relate to the world through self–world circuits. Semantic modes of being and interpersonality are added, whereby I “read” the world and others in meaningful ways co-constructed with others. This existence bears the Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc traces of a unique personal development, Effective intersubjectivity, and intercorporeality, and is jointly encoded in a neural synchrony organized into externally directed dynamic circuits of embodied activity.

Responding to the other in sustainable ways in that milieu is an ethological task requiring the development of skills that give rise to personal autonomy. The intention al arc therefore gathers into itself sensorimotor coupling between self and world, the dy namic internal flow of organism, and a normativity of the word as imperative (Laban 1977: 106). Those aspects of human ethology locate me in an objective-normative-imper Dive domain interactively created as a world of value and self-worth which are therefore highly sensitive to our relations with others. In this way language delivers us to the doorstep of reason, truth, and the inner workings of “others” as a mature or “adultist” perspective which often fails to acknowledge that, prior to sedan tics, infants and children recognize that a gesture toward anything evinces a response from the adult, not only to that thing, but to an implicit demand from the child to be rec ognized, nurtured, educated, and empowered. Gestural meaning enlists anatomical strum Cure and the flow of musculature, as bodily capacities, and the milieu of its engagement envelops us in the ontological truth of being-with, further underpinning all our later movements toward and away from things as things of this or that type themselves en countered amongst people who are there to enfold (not engulf), and create space for us to be body-subjects.

Consciousness and subjectivity result from the intentional arc and a tone that constantly strives to integrate (and balance, according to situational demands) memory, emotion, reasoning, and will so as to create the acts and interactions that make possible a lived story of being-in-the-world-with-others. Or better still, in commenting on the integration of interaction and reflection, Merleau-Monty remarks: “I am never at one with myself. Such is the fate of a being who is born, that is, a being who once and for all was given to himself as something to be understood” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: 362). The lived story dis closes meaning but also distances me from my dealings with the world allowing me to find solutions to situations underpinned by the ontogenetic evolution, from prepersonal to personal identity, whereby I speak through the person that comes into being as I relate to others. This is the basis of developed action and affect but also the basis of perplexity when the smoothly integrated flow of life and speech is disrupted. Its disordered Korma son yields an understanding of the phenomenology of mental disorder. The often vague signs and symptoms that constitute DSM-5 criteria sets do not lay bare for us the strum Cures of dissolute lived-experience that constitute mental disorder, and therefore do not transparently relate to the neural organization that makes it possible for a person to en age with her practical world and its potential challenges. While the continued search for the biological or genetic basis of mental disorder should not be outright discounted, it is imperative that the categories from which research takes its starting point be conceptual ly apt. In listening to phenomenology, a completely different way of seeing disorders is re Healed, with a clear focus on changes to structures of consciousness. If, as phenomenolo gy contends, consciousness is not a “thing” but rather a type of experience, then, as we continue to explore the intersection of neuroscience and phenomenolo Responding to the other in sustainable ways in that milieu is an ethological task requiring the development of skills that give rise to personal autonomy. The intention al arc therefore gathers into itself sensorimotor coupling between self and world, the dy namic internal flow of organism, and a normativity of the word as imperative (Laban 1977: 106). Those aspects of human ethology locate me in an objective-normative-imper Dive domain interactively created as a world of value and self-worth which are therefore highly sensitive to our relations with others. In this way language delivers us to the doorstep of reason, truth, and the inner workings of “others” as a mature or “adultist” perspective which often fails to acknowledge that, prior to sedan tics, infants and children recognize that a gesture toward anything evinces a response from the adult, not only to that thing, but to an implicit demand from the child to be rec ognized, nurtured, educated, and empowered. Gestural meaning enlists anatomical strum Cure and the flow of musculature, as bodily capacities, and the milieu of its engagement envelops us in the ontological truth of being-with, further underpinning all our later movements toward and away from things as things of this or that type themselves en countered amongst people who are there to enfold (not engulf), and create space for us to be body-subjects.

Consciousness and subjectivity result from the intentional arc and a tone that constantly strives to integrate (and balance, according to situational demands) memory, emotion, reasoning, and will so as to create the acts and interactions that make possible a lived story of being-in-the-world-with-others. Or better still, in commenting on the integration of interaction and reflection, Merleau-Monty remarks: “I am never at one with myself. Such is the fate of a being who is born, that is, a being who once and for all was given to himself as something to be understood” ( Merleau-Monty 2012: 362). The lived story dis closes meaning but also distances me from my dealings with the world allowing me to find solutions to situations underpinned by the ontogenetic evolution, from prepersonal to personal identity, whereby I speak through the person that comes into being as I relate to others. This is the basis of developed action and affect but also the basis of perplexity when the smoothly integrated flow of life and speech is disrupted. Its disordered Korma son yields an understanding of the phenomenology of mental disorder. The often vague signs and symptoms that constitute DSM-5 criteria sets do not lay bare for us the strum Cures of dissolute lived-experience that constitute mental disorder, and therefore do not transparently relate to the neural organization that makes it possible for a person to en age with her practical world and its potential challenges. While the continued search for the biological or genetic basis of mental disorder should not be outright discounted, it is imperative that the categories from which research takes its starting point be conceptual ly apt. In listening to phenomenology, a completely different way of seeing disorders is re Healed, with a clear focus on changes to structures of consciousness. If, as phenomenolo gy contends, consciousness is not a “thing” but rather a type of experience, then, as we continue to explore the intersection of neuroscience and phenomenolo Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc gy, we should not look solely for causal connections, but instead, try to make sense of the rhythms of movement, the flow, the indwelling, and the cognitive techniques comprising a human capacity to self-organize amongst the world and worldly others: “My or ganism is not some inert thing, it itself sketches out the movement of existence” (Mer lo-Monty 2012: 86).

Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc Gillette G.. “How Do I Learn To Be Me Again? Autonomy, Life Skills, and Identity.” In L. Radoilska (ed.), Autonomy and Mental Health, pp. 233–251. Oxford: Oxford Universe ty Press.

Billet G. and Haré R.. “Discourse and Diseases of the Soul.” In K. W. M. Fulford, et al. (eating disorders.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry, pp. 307–320. Oxford: Ox ford University Press.

Gillette G. and Franz E.. “Evolutionary Neurology, Responsive Equilibrium, and the Moral Brain.” Conscious and Cognition 45: 245–250.

Hughlings-Jackson J.. “On Affections of Speech from Disease of the Brain.” Brain 1: 304.

Hughlings-Jackson J.. “Remarks on Evolution and Dissolution of the Nervous Sys tem.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 33: 25.

Hurley S. L.. Consciousness in Action. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Husserl E.. Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology, trans. D. Cairns. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff.

Husserl E.. Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, trans. W. R. Joyce Gibson. London: Rutledge.

Kant I. (1978/), Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View, trans. fifth. L. Dowdell. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

Kant I.. Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View, trans. M. J. Gregory. The Hague: Martins Nijhoff.

Knot A.. Sensorimotor Cognition and Natural Language Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Laban J.. Écrits, trans. B. Fink. New York: Norton.

Marlin S. B.. Merleau-Monty’s Philosophy. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Merleau-Monty M.. “The Child”s Relations with Others.’ In J. M. Die (ed.), The Pri Lacy of Perception, pp. 96–155. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Merleau-Monty M.. The Visible and the Invisible, ed. C. Lefort, trans. A. Lings. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Merleau-Monty M.. Consciousness and the Acquisition of Language, trans. H. Sil German. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Merleau-Monty M.. Phenomenology of Perception, trans. D. A. Lades. Hoboken: Taylor and Francis.

Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc Nasser U.. Cognition and Reality: Principles and Implications of Cognitive Psy chology. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

Nietzsche F. W.. Beyond Good and Evil Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future, trans. R. J. Hollingdale. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

Northoff G.. Euro-Philosophy and the Healthy Mind: Learning from the Unwell Brain. New York: W. W. Norton.

Rabinow P.. The Foucault Reader: An Introduction to Foucault’s Thought. London: Penguin Books.

Radcliffe M.. Feelings of Being: Phenomenology, Psychiatry and the Sense of Real ty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sade R.. “Uniquely Human Social Cognition.” Current Opinion in Neurobiology 16: 235–239.

Singer T., et al.. “Empathy for Pain Involves the Effective but not Sensory Compo Bents of Pain.” Science 303: 1157.

Smith anon doming. “The Flesh of Perception.” In T. Baldwin (ed.), Reading Merleau-Monty: on Phenomenology of Perception, pp. 1–22. London: Rutledge.

Thompson E. and Varela F. J.. “Radical Embodiment: Neural Dynamics and Con sciousness.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5: 418–425.

Tomasello M.. A Natural History of Human Thinking. Cambridge: Harvard Univer City Press.

Trevarthen C. and Aiken K. J.. “Infant Intersubjectivity: Research, Theory, and Clinical Applications.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 42: 3–48.

Van Stamen C. W.. “African Approaches to an Enriched Ethics of Person-centered Health Practice.” International Journal of Person-Centered Medicine 1: 11–17.

Vasterling fifth.. “Body and Language: Butler, Merleau-Monty and Leotard on the Speaking Embodied Subject.” International Journal of Philosophical Studies 11: 205– 223.

Wittgenstein L.. Tractatus Logic-philosophicus, trans. D. F. Pears and B. McGuin Bess. London: Rutledge.

Notes:

1 ( ) For an excellent phenomenological discussion of Dotard’s delusion see Radcliffe.

Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc 2 ( ) Someone who has both the personality and behavioral features of the condition as standardly diagnosed.

Grant Gillette Grant Gillette, Department of Philosophy, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand Patrick Seniuk Center for Studies in the Theory of Practical Knowledge, SöBertörn University Phenomenological Psychopathology, Neuroscience, Psychiatric Disorders, and the Intentional Arc 2 ( ) Someone who has both the personality and behavioral features of the condition as standardly diagnosed.

Grant Gillette Grant Gillette, Department of Philosophy, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand Patrick Seniuk Center for Studies in the Theory of Practical Knowledge, SöBertörn University Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Marco O. Bertelli, Cohan De Grief, and Elisa Rondini The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Mar 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.100 Abstract and Keywords The term “neurodiversity” is commonly used to refer to intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder, which are the neurodevelopmental disorders with the most severe im pact on a person”s overall functioning along the life-span. Although a wide interpersonal variability, these conditions are associated with peculiarities in the subjective existential experience and in the psychological insight, with a particular reference to areas of emo tonality, spirituality, practical skills, socialization, and psychic suffering. These peculiar ties lead to a complex psycho-physical continuous vulnerability, including neurovegetative dystonia, lack of environmental mastery, low coping, difficulties in self-determination, re Heated losses, and societal exclusion. Care provision should aim at improving quality of life, by enabling the “neurodiverse” (or “psycho-characterized”) person to pursue a selfdevelopment aimed at optimizing the relationship between importance and satisfaction in the most mic areas of life, such as being, belonging, and becoming.

Keywords: intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, neurodiversity, vulnerability, self-experience, practical experience, social experience, quality of life # Neurodiversity and Neurodevelopmental Visor # Hers THE term “neurodiversity” is commonly used to refer to neurodevelopmental disorders, which are considered a group of conditions with early onset, often before a child enters grade school, and are characterized by deficits that produce impairments of personal, so Dial, academic, or occupational functioning. Deficits vary from very specific cognitive “functions” to more complex executive or relational skills. The term is sometimes used as an exclusive synonym for autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability—which are the most prevalent neurodevelopmental disorders—but it actually includes many other Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity clinical syndromes, such as attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, specific learning dis orders, or motor disorders.

Intellectual Disability The conceptualization of intellectual disability (also referred to here as ID) has always been controversial, as reflected by the several changes across its long history within the taxonomy of mental disorders. In fact, it is considered as a complex condition involving impairments of both mental and personal functions which are not easy to describe, such as intelligence, adaptive behavior, learning, and skills. These impairments occur in early developmental age and tend to persist across the life-span.

In spite of the complexity, issues concerning classification and diagnostic criteria are cru Dial for intellectual disability, since they have relevant implication for prevalence, inter Mention procedures, service provision, and outcomes.

Intellectual disability has been considered a relevant theme by World Health Or ganization (WHO) since it involves significant complexities surrounding the health con strict, connected to the definition, classification, and operationalization of concepts such as health “condition,” “status,” and “domain”. Recently, beside the traditional categories of signs, syndromes, disorders, diseases, and discrete entities, WHO has considered other major groupings, such as “other conditions that require spe civic health care,” “spectrum disorders,” and “syndrome groupings,” in any one of which intellectual disability could be included. Furthermore, intellectual disability has also played a role in providing a global definition of concepts such as “autonomy,” “well-being,” “deficit,” and “limitation in activities” and/or “restriction in participation,” formerly “disabilities and handicaps”.

There is still no agreement on how intellectual disability should be considered. Experts of different disciplines, such as psychology, anthropology, and sociology have interpreted this condition in different ways and the issue whether ID should be regarded as a health condition, a disability, or a life condition remains unsolved. In the tenth edition of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10; WHO 1992), intellectual disability is present with the name of “mental retardation,” within the category of psych attic conditions and impairments in intellectual functioning. On the other hand, in the In ternational Classification of Functioning (ICF; WHO 2001) impairments in intellectual functions can also be placed in the group of body functions and intended as included in disability. Conversely, the American Association for Intellectual and Developmental Visor Hers (AAIDD) defines intellectual disability as a “disability,” assembling a comprehensive description, classification, and systems of supports that concentrate principally on fun sons, adaptive behavior, and other personal needs. According to this definition, ID is a disability characterized by “significant limitations both in intellectual functioning and in adaptive behavior as expressed in conceptual, social, and practical adaptive skills” that occurs before age eighteen.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Considering intellectual disability only as a disability could entail its removal from ICD categories which are used across the world. Thus, canceling ID from the list of health conditions may have an impact on its visibility, on national and global policies, and on ser vices available to this population. On the other hand, defining intellectual disability only as a health condition would contrast with the stands adopted by many governmental poi ices and worldwide organizations, and it would be criticized as a reductionist approach by many users and experts in the field. In defining intellectual disability as a health condition, important questions remain unsolved, for example, the large grouping within the health categorization where it should be placed, the age for on set, or the link between impairments in cognitive functions and behavioral skills.

The Section Psychiatry of Intellectual Disability of the World Psychiatric Association (WPA-SPID) conceptualized intellectual disability neither as a disease nor as a disability but as a meta-syndromic group of health conditions (diseases, disorders, and others), whose clinical entities are parallel to other meta-syndromic conditions such as Dementia, and may be related to a variety of specific etiologies, ranging from genetic (e.g. fragile tenth syndrome) to nutritional (e.g. iodine deficiency), infectious (e.g. infra-uterine rubella), metabolic (e.g. phenylketonuria), or neurotoxic factors (e.g. fetal alcohol syndrome and heavy metal intoxication). This group of develop mental conditions is characterized by “a significant impairment of cognitive functions, which occurs early in the developmental age and is associated with limitations of learn ing, adaptive behavior and skills”.

In 2011, the WHO Working Group for the revision of ICD-10 extended this definition un der the new term of “Intellectual Developmental Disorders” and endorsed a polysemic di mensional approach to distinguish between the clinical meta-syndromes and their fun toning/disability counterpart. The first component, expressed by the term Intellectual De velopmental Disorders, should have a place in the ICD, while the second, expressed by the term intellectual disability, perfectly suits the ICF model. This approach would best support the public health mission of the WHO and the provision of appropriate services and opportunities to people with intellectual disability.

Autism Spectrum Disorder The conceptualization of autism has also been controversial. Eugene Bleuler coined the term “autism” to define a type of schizophrenia described by individual “inward turning” into his/her own world which entails loss of contact with the external environment. The general theory of schizophrenia proposed by Bleuler is centered on the loss of interpret Dive and relational abilities as synthetically reported by 4A theory: inappropriate or flat toned Affect, Ambivalence toward others, loosening of thought Associations, and Autism, which was described as “social withdrawal” and “preference for living in a fantasy 1 world”.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity According to Leo Banner, the fundamental symptom of autism was represented by the inability to relate to people and situations in the usual way from an early age. Autism is a disorder of social interaction which is characterized by a lack of interest in other people’s emotions.

Banner was the first to introduce the term of “Autistic Disturbances of Effective Contact,” describing eleven children presenting social withdrawal, echolalia, repetitive behaviors, and temper tantrums when their routine was disrupted.

In 1944, Asperger referred to patients very similar to those described by Banner using the term “Autistischen Psychopathen.” Nevertheless, he observed three relevant differ Fences, which are more fluent speech, higher level of learning skills, and problems in per forming large movements but not fine gestures. Thus, Banner’s autism and Asperger’s syndrome were identified as two distinct clinical forms with important common traits. At a later time, the term Asperger’s syndrome started to be attributed to autistic individuals with relatively high Intelligent Quotient (IQ) scores.

Another differentiation was proposed by Lorna Wing, who distinguished three types of autism by the pattern of social interaction: confidential, passive, and strange. The first confidential type referred to individuals indifferent to other people, detached, character zed by the presence of motor stereotypes, good mechanical skills, good visual-spatial abilities, and medium-severe cognitive impairments; the “passive” type described people with fewer symptoms that were detected later in life, and appeared to accept so Dial approaches, to meet the gaze of others, and to become involved as a passive part of a game; the “strange” type was attributed to individuals who were a bit “naïve,” but with good cognitive abilities.

In the 1950s and 1960s, autism was regarded as an early manifestation of schizophrenia and it was interpreted as an emotional disorder due to a pathological interaction between the parents and the child. For this reason, in the first edition of the Diagnostic and Stasis tidal Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) it was defined with the expression “schizo phrenic reaction, childhood type”, whereas it was classified under the terms “childhood schizophrenia” in the second edition of the manual.

It was during the 1970s that the scientific community started considering autism as a bio logical disorder with a high co-occurrence with mental retardation. The third edition of the DSM emphasized the difference between autism and schizophrenia, pre Denting six diagnostic criteria for childhood autism, including absence of delusions, halloo citations, loosening of associations, and incoherence. Furthermore, DSM-third introduced the definition of pervasive developmental disorder, as a meta-syndromic group including clusters of symptoms sharing some main features but with some differences relevant for clinical identification and outcome, such as infantile autism, residual infantile autism, childhood onset pervasive developmental disorder, residual childhood onset pervasive de velopmental disorder, and atypical autism. Nevertheless, the ninth edition of the ICD continued for decades to consider autism as a sub-category of schizophrenia.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity The current version of the DSM (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association 2013 ) merges the separate diagnostic ate Dories of DSM-third-revised, DSM-fourth, and DSM-fourth-revised meta-syndromic groups into an unique condition named “autism spectrum disorder,” characterized by different levels of symptoms intensity in two core domains defined as “deficits in social communication and social interaction” and “restricted repetitive behaviors, interests, and activities”. To make diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder both components are required and symptoms must be present at an early developmental age, even if they might become completely evident only when social demands surpass the limited abilities.

DSM-fourth and DSM-5 are held accountable for broadening the criteria for autism spectrum conditions which might have led to a progressive rise in prevalence rates. A recent trend to further enlarge the number of psychopathological features com poised in the autism spectrum disorder (Tamara and Condo 2014; Dell’Oslo et al. 2015a, b) needs to be better evaluated for potential negative impact on research and clinical re sources for the autism spectrum disorder core sub-type captured under the classical Kan ner description and associated with lower personal functioning profiles and varying level of intellectual disability comorbidity, ascribed as a specifier in the DSM-5.

Although they pertain to two different constructs, autism spectrum disorder and intellect Dual disability often co-occur. The literature reports that 70% of people with autism spec rum disorder present some level of intellectual disability and another undetermined portion have some kind of impairment in specific cognitive functioning. On the other hand, around 30– 40% of people with intellectual disability have an autism spectrum disorder or pervasive autistic features.

The Neurodevelopmental Perspective At present, the neurodevelopmental perspective is probably the most valued theoretical framework to explain the relationships between the different biological, psychological, and environmental systems. It answers an increased need of multi-level and multidiscipli nary approaches to improve the scientific comprehension of mental disorders’ echo-patio genesis, prevention, and care planning.

Also the new DSM-5 embraced a developmental focus and introduced the new meta-strum Cure of “Neurodevelopmental Disorders”, which has replaced the DSM-fourth-TR section “Disorders usually first diagnosed in infancy, childhood, or adolescence”. As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, this supra-ordinal group includes disorders which are apparently very different from each other, such as intellectual dis ability, autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, or motor Visor Hers, but which may share echo-pathogenetic, risk, and clinical factors, such as neurode velopmental genetic phenotype, abnormal neural circuit development, dysfunctions in cognition, learning, communication, and behavior, early emergence, continuing course, and co-occurrence.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity The neurodevelopmental perspective also provides an appropriate consideration of the way intellectual disability fades into normality, which is represented by borderline intel lectual functioning (BIF), where the overall IQ reduction does not overcome the threshold of two standard deviations below the general population mean, as in intellectual disabili ty. Borderline intellectual functioning is an extremely complex clinical entity, which has scarcely been studied and for which the scientific community has not reached even a min mum consensus on what the term should describe. In spite of these limits linked to the lack of terminological agreement, the prevalence of BIF is reported to be extremely high, ranging in the different studies between 12% and 18% of the population.

One of the most significant advances related to the neurodevelopmental perspective is the acknowledgment that disorders which have always been considered completely differ ent to each other (e.g. intellectual disability, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder) may co-oc cur or represent variations of the same biological predisposition depending on the person’s age or environment. It has increasingly been shown that copy number variants of many syndromes including intellectual disability are present also in many autism spec rum disorders and other psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depressive disorder.

The Complex Vulnerability of Neurodiversity It is widely proved that persons with intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder present a higher vulnerability to mental and physical health problems than the general population.

Physical illnesses are reported to be around 2. fold higher, with obesity, metabolic disorders, skeletal disorders, osteoporosis, thyroid problems, cardiac disorders, sensory impairments, and dementia being particularly frequent. People with intellectual disability also have a shorter life expectancy.

The full range of mental health problems has been reported to be four times as prevalent as it is in the general population, to appear earlier in life, and to per Dist across the life-span. The co-occurrence of autism spectrum disorder has been assoc ted with a further increase in the prevalence of adjunctive mental health issues, particularly in respect to Batten son-deficit/hyperactive disorder, mood disorders, eating disorders, and repetitive behave Tors.

As mentioned earlier, the origin of such a high level of vulnerability lies within a complex interaction between biological, psychological, and social-environmental factors. Some of the most frequently reported biological factors are represented by genetic alterations, chronic physical disabilities, hypoactivity, unhealthy eating habits, inadequate personal Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity hygiene, or pharmacological side effects. The risk of developing a psychiatric disorder was found to be dependent also on the severity of intellectual disability (at least for some disorders), and impairment of adaptive skills.

Common psychological factors are lack of environmental mastery, low coping, commune cation deficits, and difficulties in self-determination, while the environmental influence is most frequently expressed by lack of satisfactory social relations and practical activities, inadequate living arrangements, repeated failures, or other negative life events and Frau masc experiences.

A phenomenological description is provided here with reference to subjective, practical, and social experiences of persons with neurodevelopmental disorders, as reported in the literature and in the personal archives of the authors of the present chapter. This description, which includes thoughts on major existential issues, such as in sight, time flow, mortality, and singularity is a kind of abstract of the life actuality as told by these persons. For us this process of interpretation can be conceptualized as a phe nomenological reduction to the basic categories that structure our common human conj son.

The Self-experience of Being (Euro)diverse The description of the self-experience of being neurodiverse is quite hard, mainly because of the difficulties some of these persons have in adequately communicating their own feelings and inner events. The shift from first-person to third-person perspective may de ermine a considerable depletion in the clinician’s ability to understand, as mental states are subjective and direct access to them is probably the only way to get in touch with their complexity.

Beyond this Poetic limit, the experience of being “neurodiverse” involves many other deli ate issues. The first one refers to the act of comparing yourself with other persons, which often provokes “unheimlich” (“uncanny”) feelings, because it affects the very Noun Cations of our human nature. This is particularly true when the comparison is influenced by the others’ need to objectify the label of “disabled.” The birth —or by extension the “diagnostic discovery”—of a child with a developmental disability shatters the dreams and the narcissistic project of the parents, as well as their perception of being-in-the-world and the way they experience time and life horizons. Another trauma Sizing character of the disability lies in the fact of the otherness being experienced too early, too intensely, and too radically. The usually slow pace of attuning dreamed reality to true reality needs more support and work.

In general, the meeting of two individuals with and without developmental disability obliges both of them to face a phenomenologically dual problem, which is the difficulty of identifying the impact that the disability has on the expressions of self-experiences.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity The life of those with intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder is punctuated by experiences which imply a considerable difficulty in defining the width of the atypicalness of their first-person givenness and their self-development across time. On the one hand there is the existential normative question: “Am I (still) a human being?” “Do I exist as a member of the humanity?”—or in contemporary jargon: “Am I included in society?”... Steven was the second of three children. Mary—his older sister with a physical handicap—died some time before. His parents’ marriage was already in trouble and they were facing severe psychological difficulties. It meant that they had very little time left for Steven and he adapted to this, being seen as a “perfect quiet” baby. During a classic routine medical assessment, he was found to be affected by cerebral palsy. After having witnessed violence at home and after having been vic tim of attacks on himself, Steven was referred to me for psychotherapy. For sever al sessions he continued falling asleep. He stopped only when a safe contact with me was built up and I realized how sleeping could have been a protection for all the exhaustion he felt for being in the world. He suddenly opened his eyes and said “shut up”. I thought that with these two of the very few words he ever said to me he was expressing the overcome from his secondary handicaps, his defenses against preconceived meanings. After some further sessions, during which he showed a pitiful crying, he became more affectionate and responsive. He also stopped injuring himself. After two years of therapy his interaction skill was great ly improved, he started to react to what happened inside and outside the therapy room (“rain outside, “your tummy” gurgled, putting a hand to his ear as for in creasing the sensitivity of the “outdoor”). He seemed to achieve a “psychological birth” and started to try to express himself toward existential themes. In Steven’s case the wish for words to exist had developed only through the satisfaction per caved for being with me as a therapist able to bear the meaning of non-verbal communication.

(Sinason 1992: 150–151)

The differentiation between “in”-clusion and “ex”-clusion is strongly related to the way normality and abnormality are conceptualized. The categorical classifications—even the psychopathological ones, which have been touched before—are based on a qualitative structural differentiation between normality and abnormality, while the daily experience of care providing seems to be more appropriately referred to a quantitative perspective of this differentiation. These different approaches also have ethical implications— the categorical one considers a person with neurodevelopmental disorders as a “humanly strange” individual, while the dimensional one remains focused on the suffering the per son is experiencing, independently of how different he/she may appear. The intellectually disabled person makes us rethink the classical notions of norm, and places them in a lag er ethical and facts-of-life frame. In short, understanding the phenomenon of “disability” is the ultimate psychopathological challenge for everyone involved.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity On the other hand, “neurodiversity” is a phenomenon that confronts everyone within the core relational texture of the neurodiverse person—but mostly the neurodiverse person himself—with the hazards of a fundamentally disjointed time. The life horizon of the child and of his social context are under threat. All hopes and dreams remain literally “en eloped.” The passage of time and the generational progression can slow down or even come to a halt. Phenomenologically speaking the now appears as a per petually frozen time of thwarted expectations and pent-up disappointments. This frozen time is the primary symptom of the trauma, as well as the ineffectual attempt to neutral ize it.

Both these aspects of the traumatically threatened conditions of being-in-the-world for the disabled person and his parents form the “existential radical” which affects every do main of their life, and determines both their troubles and satisfactions. Declensions of this “radical” also manifest in the societal attribution of psychopathological character, as indicated by the terms used in the past to define ID, such as “mental retardation” or “fee ble-mindedness.”

This trauma casts a deep shadow on the relational history of the disabled person and his immediate Mitwelt, stresses his Effective evolution, and enhances the risk of a problemat ic development of the indispensable separation and individuation. The disabled person in creasingly develops a contractual ambivalence, which determines in turn an exaggerated attitude to accordance and concordance, and centripetally culminates in fusion and sym biosis with the main relational figure.

Also, this radical experience might well prove to be the Verstehungsgrund for the in creased incidence of anxiety and depression on the one hand and the many behavioral problems on the other, the latter being a consequence of an insufficient attuning to the emotional functioning of intellectually disabled persons.

This allow us to comprehend that persons with neurodevelopmental disorders and their proxies wave between two phenomenological-psychiatric fundamental attitudes toward the way they get and keep in contact with others, as well as in their mood swings, namely between a manic and a depressive attitude. The manic attitude attempts to obliterate the handicap and tries every trick in the book to “solve” the disability. The depressive one on the contrary adopts a disillusioned relation with the disability which leads to sentences like “this is not the child we dreamed of,” “we cannot even dream about this child any more.” Also the disabled child cannot allow himself to dream his own dream. For him and his proxies the dynamism of life threatens to shrivel to a static survival, bereft of any out look.

They have to face the enormous psychic challenge of sidestepping both the pitfalls of manic denial and the depressive bleakness.

Ali—a boy eight years old with a severe mental handicap—whose vocabulary was extremely simple “I Hulk,” “I wake,” “I angry,” dramatically changed after having introduced bears, dolls and a clown in the therapy room. Suddenly he looked at Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity the clown and he said “I sad,” “It is not just my circumstar (his word for circumci ion) that is sad” and... “ I man now,” “Everything all right”. He lifted the clown to show me the happy face and then the sad face.... I said he was showing me that although he was saying everything was all right, he was sad be cause everything was not all right...; “All right?” is very much a working-class version of “how are you?”

(Sinason 1992: 115–131)

Undoubtedly we can glean from the problematic histories of attachment some essential elements allowing us to understand that many people with an intellectual disability Bevel op a damaged self, a fragile self, with a reduced narcissistic resilience. This raises the question of the extent to which they can overcome the intellectual disability and make their “own mind.”

This perspective can help to understand why one of the main skills of many of those with intellectual disability is to adapt to what their parents and educators expect from them, and why on the contrary they have so much trouble dreaming their own dreams, going their own way, using the pathic verbs, dare, can, may, want, longing for their own rights, and becoming a sense-creating subject.

When an individual repeatedly experiences the feeling that he does not have control over many situations linked to internal, stable, and/or global qualities, he may generalize this experience to most circumstances in his life and develop a consciousness of being help less. Once the helplessness is learned it leads to an expectation of adversity and the pre diction of negative outcomes in future situations, which may determine in turn further cognitive and motivational deficits.

Both from a theoretical approach and from clinical experience it becomes apparent that in the family history of a person with an intellectual disability the following five life themes are unconsciously and consciously at work at the same time, and need to be treated, sometimes also in a therapeutic way: 1. the handicap itself as primary characteristic: “because I perceive myself as handicapped and not like the others, I emphasize my handicap or I behave as if it was not me” “May I become Jenny? Do you like me this way?” Indicating physically handicapped people: “they are handicapped.”

2. the loss experience affecting it: “please don’t go away and...,”

3. the sense of dependency resulting from it: “... stay with me all the time and for ever” “Will you be my mum?” “When my mum dies I want to die also”

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity 4. sexuality as source and transmission of life: “do you love me but I’m not allowed to have a relationship” “sexuality is some thing bad”

5. death and the fear of being killed as final symbols of finiteness: “I saw on the TV that they kill babies with Down syndrome” “They are afraid that I will have a baby” “Do you have children, are they also handicapped?”

A phenomenological support perspective needs, therefore, to focus on melting the frozen time perceived by the person with intellectual disability, which also represents the most effective way to start a process of empowerment. In effect this process implies a radical change of the existential perspective: from a timeless, static totalitarian “all or nothing” to a dynamic and hopeful “not yet” and “already,” with a higher insight and a higher com pliancy for personal limits (see Barale et al. this volume).

Emotional and Spiritual Life Scientific interest in the emotional skills of persons with intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder is rapidly expanding, with the majority of studies addressing emotion recognition and showing a good capacity to reliably identify their own and other persons’ emotions, particularly through facial expressions. However, some authors identified some ecu liarities in labeling specific emotions in comparison to the general population, as difficult ties or advantages. Happiness has been repeatedly found to be more easily identified, while neutral faces raise higher issues. There is some evidence that individuals with intellectual disability use a limited repertoire of coping strategies when emotionally aroused, while a relationship between emo son recognition and aggression is controverted.

The spirituality of persons with intellectual disability has also attracted some attention in recent research. Nevertheless, the specific meaning of spirituality for people with intel lectual disability and autism spectrum disorder still represents a relatively unexplored area, with little data on how such individuals see and live their own spirituality and how they express their spiritual needs.

This lack of attention comes from the common thought that a deep cognitive deficit pre vents from developing and understanding immaterial life aspects.

Such investigations as there are into spiritual growth opportunities have repeatedly den tidied great limitations caused by frequent expectation conflicts among care service providers and religious leaders, transportation problems, lack of support staff, and an insufficient tolerance toward some of the behave Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Tors showed by people with neurodevelopmental disorders in the religious communities. Against old prejudices, recent neuroscientific acquisitions show that even people with the most severe intellectual disability have the potential to sense and develop an interior transcendent dimension. In fact, the emotional sphere of the human psyche, that is, the basis of spirituality, is defined as significantly distinct from the intellectual sphere, whose deficiencies determine the diagnosis of disability.

Some authors argue that rationality can even represent a limit for spirituality, providing descriptions of some extremely intense spiritual experiences in people with intellectual disability.

According to some authors, the problem that spirituality requires a certain level of men tal skills should be passed, even before being considered scientifically, through the apple cation of prevalent philosophical-anthropological principles, which identifies spirituality as a fundamental and natural dimension in every human being regardless of the level of mental functions.

In people with Down syndrome a feeling of spiritual well-being resulted in a general sass faction toward life and other specific dimensions as self-control, building of positive Bela tionships, acceptance of difficulties and life changes, internalization of existential mean Dings and aspects transcending individuality. Recently, the connection between spirituality and quality of life was explained through the concept of “Spiritual Well-Being,” which expresses how a spiritual dimension affects an individual’s well-being and quality of life. Several studies identify spire Duality as a dimension with a positive effect on the general well-being of people with intel lectual disability or autism spectrum disorder (Coulter 2006; Bossing and Koenig 2010; Glicksman 2011; Liégeois 2014) and many aspects related to physical health, such as the absence of diseases (Seaway and Ashcan 1998; D’Sousa R 2007) or the increase of life ex pectancy.

Practical Experience Practical experiences of people with neurodevelopmental disorders include several issues and difficulties they have to face in their daily lives. In fact, many people report finding routine activities difficult and say they need support with a variety of daily tasks such as cooking, shopping, getting around town, going to the cinema, using technology, managing money, finding a job, going to the doctor, or crossing the road. Some young adults with in tellectual disability have been taught by their families or caregivers to do many tasks such as reading bus timetables or going shopping. Nevertheless, most of them find such daily activities challenging and need the help of caregivers.

According to the findings of a consultation conducted on behalf of the National Disability Authority (NDA) (Independent and Community Living: Focus Group Consultation Report; NDA 2010), grocery and clothes shopping is one area that presents difficulties for some Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity people with intellectual disability, as we can see looking at some of the comments collect ed by the authors: I go shopping with my mam and if she tells me to go and get milk I go and give it to her. I know where everything is in the shop. Sometimes I go to the shop for a sandwich or a drink. I do shopping with my mam and sometimes on my own. (NDA 2000: chapter 2.3, paragraph “Grocery shopping”)

I sometimes forget things in shops. On Sundays I get a newspaper for my nanny and my mam will write down the name of the paper that I have to get. I know how much it costs and the right change. (NDA 2000: chapter 2.3, paragraph “Grocery shopping”)

I need someone with me if I was buying trousers. I buy what I want but sometimes they are not the right size. I get people to help me buy clothes... I can handle money ok. Staff are with me when I buy clothes.

(NDA 2000: chapter 2.3, paragraph “Shopping for clothes”)

Getting around generally also entails a number of challenges for people with intellectual disability and low-functioning autism spectrum disorder. They may have difficulties in us ing public transport services, finding places in town, or crossing the road, as expressed in the words of some young adults (Independent and Community Living: Focus Group Con sultation Report; NDA 2010): Sometimes I find it hard to cross the road. The cars go too fast and it is very dan Serous not to cross at the lights. When I cross the road at traffic lights, sometimes I don’t see things good and I can’t see which way the cars are coming. If you get hit by a car, you are dead like.

(NDA 2010: chapter 2.3, paragraph “Getting around”)

If you get lost in town you might not know where you are going. Me too. I got lost when I was young.

(NDA 2010: chapter 2.3, paragraph “Getting around”)

When I go the cinema or anywhere I go in the car with my mam... I have never taken a bus by myself and would’t like to...

(NDA 2010: chapter 2.3, paragraph “Getting around”)

Moreover, some people with ID do not seem to like going out because of public attitudes they perceive, and avoid going to shops or dealing with locals in particular. They say that people “look at them funny” and “talk down to them.”

Another major area of concern is living arrangements, which has been found to signify Scantly impact on overall individual quality of life. Nevertheless, in Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity this group issues related to housing may be particularly challenging due to difficulties specifically associated with the condition or to social disadvantages that people with ID often experience. The complexity of a person’s vulnerability is often closely related to their living situations and levels of independence they have. For example, people with ID living in group home situations may have less possibility of choice, becoming more ex posed to neglect or exploitation by staff or other decision-makers (https:// communitydoor.org.au).

People with intellectual disability may have difficulties in accepting the high number of regulations operating in residential services, which they perceive as a restriction on their choices. In some cases, older people with intellectual disability feel that staff members do not treat them like adults, even though they acknowledge that staff are probably con corned with their safety (Independent and Community Living: Focus Group Consultation Report; NDA 2010). We can better understand this view by looking at the words of an adult with intellectual disability living in a residential service: You have to come in at this time and to have a bath when I don’t want a bath. I want a bath tomorrow. The same with dinner—you have fish today but I don’t want fish, I want steak. They take the kettle away at night (for safety) and you can’t make tea before you go to bed... There is too much safety at times. It has gone over the top. People should be allowed to make mistakes. There is too much con tool. You have to give people choices and be able to make mistakes.

(NDA 2010: chapter 2.4, paragraph “Group housing”)

Most of the younger adults with ID would like to live more independently away from their families and staff (Independent and Community Living: Focus Group Consultation Report; NDA 2010 ). They believe that living independently would allow them to have greater free dom to do what they want, to go where they want (provided it is safe), and to have their own space. Nevertheless, at the same time most of them feel they would require ass's Dance with various daily routines.

I would be a little bit worried living by myself. Sometimes the 23 bus does’t go when it should. Sometimes I am lazy. I don’t do much cooking. I love to cook but when I see my mam cooking I can see it is difficult.

(NDA 2010: chapter 2.4, paragraph “Accommodation”)

I would just like to have a housemate. I have three carers who come in and I do get time on my own but I would like more time on my own without staff coming and going. I feel it is not my house.

(NDA 2010: chapter 2.4, paragraph “Accommodation”)

I live out in independent living. I wash and cook myself. I don’t have to wait for the staff to cook for me. I cook my own dinner and my own tea. I am able to do every thing and I pay my own bills for the house. I have emergency response in case Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity anyone comes to the door. It records to see who is outside. I am safe.....I live on my own. I love it.

(NDA 2010: chapter 2.4, paragraph “Independent accommodation”)

I want to live in an apartment, maybe close to where I live now in Donabate or maybe in Busk or Balbriggan. I would like to live with my girlfriend.

(NDA 2010: chapter 2.4, paragraph “Accommodation”)

According to the findings of the above-mentioned consultation, when asked what they would do with €1,000, most people with intellectual and developmental disorders would like to go on holiday, give money to their families, and buy a house. One participant with complex physical and intellectual disability said he would just like to be respected, to per cave himself as important, and to be listened to when he expresses his opinion.

Physical and mental health problems, unemployment, poor or inadequate education, so Dial isolation, inappropriate or unsafe accommodation represent common risk factors for socio-economic disadvantage for many people with intellectual disability.

It is likely that the relation between economic disadvantage and intellectual and develop mental disabilities is due in part to the health and social inequalities people with these conditions and their families experience. This relation seems to reflect two distinct processes. First, poverty is a risk factor for the development of these disorders, an effect which is mediated through the correlation between the socio-economic disadvantage and exposure to a number of environmental and psychosocial hazards. Second, families sup porting a person with intellectual disabilities are at greater risk of experiencing poverty due to the financial and social impact of caring and the exclusion of people with intellect Dual disabilities from the working environment.

Practical experiences are more than just utilitarian activities, they represent a declension of an incarnate (gestaltung) inclusion, and have a relational implication. Carrying out practical tasks defines the extent to which a person with neurodevelopmental disorders expresses the intersubjective meaning of “doing,” and the way he/she is in the world with others.

Social Experience People with neurodevelopmental disorders say they like having friends but in fact many of them do not have friends outside their care facilities. Their social life is often limited to people and places where they feel safe and as a result most of their friendships are re striated to people they meet in the services and their families at home. Due to their impaired social skills and their be havioral peculiarities, persons with intellectual disability may not be able to avoid or end social situations they perceive as negative and it seems that the relationships they stab Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Dish are characterized by less intimacy and reciprocity than those of their peers without intellectual disability. Furthermore, their sexuality is likely to be limited. This has both historical and contemporary causes which are closely related to the eugenics argue Bents that were prevalent early this century and to prevailing attitudes toward people with intellectual disability which can compel them to have sexual intercourse secretly, in creasing their risk of being victims of abuse.

Sexual health is a vital but often neglected aspect of health care for people with neurode velopmental disorders. For decades, they were thought to be asexual, having no need for loving and fulfilling relationships with others. Individual rights to sex Duality have been denied with negative consequences on their gender identity, friendships, self-esteem, body image, emotional growth, and social behavior (Joint Position Statement of AAIDD and The Arc 2013. Available at: In reality, young adults with mild intellectual disability seem to understand love very con cretely, describing it as a combination of various positive feelings that produces happy Bess, peace of mind, and good mood. They also perceived love as a fundamental part of their lives, with a crucial impact on overall well-being. Young adults with ID connect love with precise personal experiences, understand ing love in many ways. The behaviors they describe are mainly associated with daily inter actions and attention paid to the partner, such as each supporting the other, tenderness, presence and attention, honesty, listening, and intimacy.

Well, you can feel it when you fall in love. At least I do have the sensation that someone really cares. You can really know it, too, if the other one does not care, you can sense it.

(Mattila et al. 2017: 300)

Specific social challenges are experienced at school and during other training and educ tonal routes. A significant percentage of people with intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder present serious communication impairments, and it is quite common for them to leave school without having achieved basic reading, writing, and math skills. They often need learning support and they are less likely to participate in school active ties. These and other issues related to the school environment can significantly influence young people with intellectual disability the opportunity to benefit as they should from their educational experiences. Children and adolescents with intellectual deficits are of ten passive, submissive, and clumsy and, therefore, they are easier victims of abuse and bullying by peers. O’Condor and Fawkes (2000: 4) reported the words of one such individ ual: I knew there was something wrong with me. There were certain things I could’t do in my head. Lots of students just thought I din’t want to go to school. They said things about me behind my back, things that really hurt then. They said I had brain damage. Would have hated to be at Special School because people would Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity tease you, treat you like a fool. Sometimes I would be chased and bullied by two guys, verbally abused. I used to hide.

A lack of acceptance or experiences of discrimination in school were a major concern for them. Besides being the result of direct social experiences the negative impact of stigma may also influence their self-concept, leading to low levels of self-esteem. Whatever form discrimination takes, there has been consistent evidence that people with moderate to mild intellectual disabilities are aware of the stigmatized treatment that they experience.

In school (elementary school), it was unhappy for us that they (classmates) saw us in strange ways. I din’t like it and felt embarrassed. Their stares made me feel like a monster!

(Chen and Shu 2012: 246)

People with intellectual disability may sense stigmatized treatment throughout their lives and feel rejected by their peers. A particularly challenging time is the transition from school into employment. In fact, after leaving school many young people with intellectual disability have difficulties in finding a work or valued roles in their community, due to the negative social perception or confined social environment. The many challenging characteristics and behaviors that individuals with intellectual dis ability or autism spectrum disorder present can make them appear unsuitable for employ Bent, with an additional negative impact on their social inclusion and psychological distress.

Although it is commonly believed that people with ID receive a lot assistance from family members, service providers, or other organizations, in fact, many of them experience so Dial isolation and exclusion.

I’d like to have friends. It’s really hard. I’ve tried lots of groups but none have worked out. I get really worried about if anyone is going to like me and if anyone is going to have things in common with me and it goes around in my mind and it’s hard to decide to go, so a lot of times I don’t.

(O’Condor and Fawkes 2000: 5)

A great majority of people with neurodevelopmental disorders have limited resources to develop connections with others members of the community and to participate in comm City activities. As a result, they are often socially restricted to organizationally based so Dial activities with other people with neurodevelopmental disorders and rely on support systems for developing and maintaining meaningful relationships within other contexts. Discrimination and prejudice Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity against people with intellectual disability are often major challenges to their inclusion in the social networks of the community.

According to Abbott and McConkey, people with intellectual disability themselves recognize various barriers to community inclusion, for example, not being accepted by other individuals or having limited opportunities for social exchange. A systematic review of the literature has identified a number of environmental fac tors which positively condition the participation of persons with intellectual disability in community activities. Some of these factors are decision-making opportunities, environs mental stimulation, engagement of families, presence of services, social support, and pos itive personal attitudes.

People with intellectual disability are also more vulnerable to becoming victims of crime than the general population. This is probably due to the nature of their condition and the life circumstances in which they live which may make them extremely vulnerable to such experiences. French suggests that between 50 and 99% of people with intellectual and psychosocial impairments are subject to sexual assault in their lifetimes. The lack of meaningful and emotionally helpful relationships may increase their possibility of expert Incing sexual assault through their search for companionship. An overwhelming majority of victims are women but men are also highly vulnerable to experiencing sexual assault. Moreover, sexual assault against people with intellect Dual disability is more likely to be repeated or violent.

These attacks occur very often in familiar places and the perpetrator is generally a per son known to the victim, such as another person with intellectual disability who frequents the same living or social environments, or service providers (e.g. teachers, caregivers, or support staff). According to Sobsey, vulnerable people are made more vulnerable by the prevailing attitude of our society which teaches a person with dis ability to be compliant, especially toward authority figures.

Expressing Mental Health Suffering In people with intellectual disability psychopathological suffering is usually much more difficult to identify than in the general population. Beside the “diagnostic overshadow ing,” which refers to the difficulty of distinguishing the adjunctive psychopathological symptoms from the observed or referred dysfunctions and behavioral alterations due to the basic condition of intellectual disability, there are issues linked to the presentation of sump toms, which often is atypical, chaotic, intermittent, fluctuating, masked, mixed, or poorly defined.

The literature highlights a variety of factors that may determine these peculiarities, such as the developmental level, previous life experiences, and interpersonal, cultural, and en vironmental influences. Deficits in abstract thinking can limit introspective capacity and lead to difficulties in recognizing emotional symptoms, in defining one’s own Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity life experiences, and in communicating states of suffering. People with intellectual disability can be passive and compliant due to a lower bail ity to tolerate stress and to a consequent anxiety-induced decompensation. People with more severe intellectual disability tend to express their psychic suffering ex Elusively through behavioral changes, including an increase in the severity or frequency of chronic maladaptive behaviors (“baseline exaggeration effect”; Sooner 1986; Sturmey and Ley 1990; Moss et al. 2000). Poor verbal expression abilities, impoverished social skills, and typical life experiences may also develop into “psychosocial masking” that may lead to symptoms which do not seem as rich and defined as in the general population. An aspect that strongly characterizes the emotional dysregulation of many persons with intellectual disability is the neurovegetative vulnerability, with pains, organ dysfunctions, changes in circadian rhythms, and dystonia of the autonomic nervous sys tem being very frequent.

The extent to which a behavioral change or problem can be interpreted as an expression of psychic suffering is a key question in psychopathology of intellectual disability. Some studies identified a relationship between problem behaviors and psychiatric disorders in people with intellectual disability, particularly strong in in dividuals with lower level of functioning, and some problem behaviors have been reported to be symptoms’ equivalents of specific disorders, es Specially if accompanied by other observable symptoms of the same disorder, such as sleep alteration, considerable appetite changes, or neurovegetative dystonia. Other studies found no evidence of equivalence and main Gained that problem and maladaptive behaviors should be interpreted as non-specific Hindi actors of emotional distress rather than atypical symptoms.

In spite of all this, psychological vulnerability of intellectual disability is a neglected topic in the mental health sector, particularly in adult psychiatry. Care needs often remain un detected and unmet.

Many reasons have been identified for this lack of attention, including the above men toned atypical presentation of symptoms and the diagnostic overshadowing with the manifestations of the neurodevelopmental disorder itself. However, the most relevant one is probably the assumption that the early neurodevelopmental impairment represents an untreatable neurological condition which significantly and definitely compromises the overall psychic functioning, so that there is not even the possibility of experiencing psy chiatric suffering or at least of using any of the psychopathological knowledge acquired with the general population. Another major linked reason is a lengthy historiography of discrimination and stigma.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity # The Issue of Unitary Intelligence As mentioned earlier, intelligence reduction has a central role in the diagnostic criteria of intellectual disability in the current classification systems. It is also very relevant for the differential diagnosis with autism spectrum disorder and between autism spectrum disorder sub-groups. In the DSM-5 intelligence is still defined in a very general way, as reasoning, problem-solving, planning, abstract thinking, jug Bent, academic learning, and learning from experience.

At present the assessment of intelligence is carried out exclusively through IQ measure Bent, although there is mounting evidence on that this often determines generic diagnose tic labels and fails to capture individual variability in specific cognitive skills as well as the association with other variables of interest, such as genetic or biological factors.

Intelligence theories have evolved over the years, from unicomponential (g factor) or oligocomponential models, measuring individual performance on all cognitive tasks with a unique score, to more differentiated structures, with a combination of multiple special zed and interrelated cognitive functions, such as the Cattell-Horn-Carroll or the “Planning, Attention, Simultaneous, and Successive” mod els. At the same time, new instruments for measuring IQ level have been developed. Un fortunately, their utility in people with neurodevelopmental disorders is still questioned. The presence of the widely known floor effects and other measurements problems specif ic of this population limit the efficacy in capturing intellectual functioning, specifically of those with more severe impairment.

Research findings reveal that in people with intellectual disability the same IQ score can be related to very different cognitive weaknesses and strengths, also on the basis of ethiopathogenic factors. As an example, persons with Down syndrome usually manifest impairments in specific areas of language, long-term memory, and motor performance, while showing relative strengths in visuo-spatial con struction. In contrast persons with Williams syndrome present deficits in attention, visuo-spatial construction, short-term memory, and planning, while showing relative ability in auditory processing and concrete lan gauge.

Furthermore, deficits in individual functioning, behavioral problems, and euro-bio-psy chological alterations associated with intellectual disability are reported in the literature to be more significantly correlated with the impairment of specific cognitive function rather than with overall IQ score.

The variability between and within cognitive phenotype is also present in autism spec rum disorder. Of particular interest is the finding that in people with autism spectrum disorder low IQ scores are not necessarily a direct expression of an impairment of overall cognitive functioning, since they strictly correlate with anomalies of information process Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity ing, which in turn have pervasive effects on the overall intellectual functioning.

Despite this evidence, specific cognitive functions in people with neurodevelopmental dis orders are still not given much attention, either in research or daily practice. Different terms are often used for the same functions, and vice versa. Also the differentiation be tween specific cognitive functions and executive functions is often uncertain. Studies are scanty and limited to working memory, orientation response, and attention switch. Thus, there is still no conceptual map or hierarchy of the cognitive fun sons and domains in neurodevelopmental disorders. However, in peo ple with intellectual disability a series of cognitive domains have been reported to be more significantly impaired than others, and include perceptual reasoning, working mem ory, processing speed, and verbal comprehension.

The above-mentioned WHO Working Group for the revision of ICD-10 addressed this is sue by proposing for conceptualization of intellectual disability within the ICD-11 the adoption of an articulated model of cognitive impairment, which might have relevant im plications not only for education and services provision, but also for the general cultural attitude toward intellectual disability itself. This model juxtaposes a new concept of dimensional cognitive characterization with that of normal/subnormal in telligence and substitutes the measurement of IQ with the assessment of very specific cognitive functions and a contextualized description of consequent adaptive and learning difficulties. According to this approach, the clinical evaluation should aim to identify those cognitive dysfunctions that have the greatest negative impact in terms of behavior, adjustment, autonomy, and above all quality of life across the life-span. A retesting during critical life periods would also be useful, as distinct cognitive develop mental trajectories have been identified in different intellectual developmental disorders and cognitive losses overcome related to aging, earlier and more frequently than in the general pop Cation.

Examples of neuropsychological tools used for revealing more complex profiles of cogni Dive functioning are KAIT— Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test, WCST— Wis cousin Card Sorting Test, and CAS— Cognitive Assessment System, for which simplified versions have been provided. Nevertheless, these tests are difficult to carry out on those with an intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder. The complexity of these issues requires the use of neuropsychological measures progressively and promptly adapted to the various levels of severity of intellectual disability.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity # Adaptive Behavior and Attunement to the # Environment Adaptive behavior includes cognitive, social, and practical skills; it increases in complex ty with developmental stages. For each age class, the appropriate levels of adaptive be Savior are not exactly definable because they depend on the expectations of the environs Bent. The scientific community agrees that adaptive behavior is a multidimensional construct, but there is no agreement about the nature or number of factors that should be considered for its definition, although several pieces of research have been conducted to answer this question, as well as to identify typical patterns of adaptive behavior in people with genetic syndromes including intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder, such as Down syndrome or Fragile tenth syndrome.

From a practical point of view, the assessment of adaptive behavior is based on the evalu Cation of individual daily performance in facing up to various situations in different life en vironments.

The DSM-5 and the forthcoming ICD-11 emphasizes the need to adopt standardized Blini cal evaluations for the diagnosis of intellectual disability, based on the severity of the im pairment in adaptive behaviors rather than on the IQ score. The three domains of main impact have been identified as conceptual (language, writing, reading, reasoning, and memory abilities), social (awareness of other people’s thoughts and emotions, empathy, social judgment, interpersonal relationships), and practical (selfmanagement, e.g. personal care, social responsibility, leisure activities, organization of school, and work tasks). Most common assessment tools, such as the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales or the Asap Dive Behavior Assessment System (ABAS second; Oakland and Harrison 2008), detail these main domains in a variety of areas, including conceptual skills (i.e. arithmetic skills, knowing numbers, and shapes), communication (i.e. comprehension and use of written and oral language), daily living skills (i.e. self-care, home living, professional activities), socialization (i.e. interpersonal relationships, social problem-solving, recreational active ties, respect of social norms, community use), health and safety (i.e. following safety rules, showing caution when needed, staying out of danger, and knowing when to get help), leisure (i.e. playing, hobbies, following rules in games, planning fun activities), selfdirection (i.e. self-control, making choices, starting and completing tasks, following a rou tine, and following directions), and motor skills (both gross and fine).

The assessment of adaptive behaviors is particularly useful in planning and verifying Hindi visualized intervention programs and in monitoring rehabilitative progress; some phe nomenologists argue that it may also be considered an operationalization of the level of attunement between the person and his environment ( Um-Mitwelt ) (Dõsen and De Grief 2015).

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity In the context of adaptive skills, the terms functioning and behavior are frequently used synonymously. Limited intellectual functioning affects social and emotional functioning. Many persons with intellectual disability function on an emotional and social level far be low the average for their age. Impairments in functioning consist in lack of at tainment of developmental and sociocultural standards for personal autonomy and social responsibility. Without continuing support, these deficits limit functioning in daily active ties, such as communication, social participation, and autonomy, and in different areas, such as family, school, work, and community.

One of the problems with the functioning label is that it tends to focus almost exclusively on IQ and main abilities. However, this is a very narrow scope for neurodevelopmental disorders, which are by definition pervasive across all areas of a person’s life, with high interindividual differentiation. There are persons with a considerable impairment of IQ and overall adaptation who have minimal difficulties with their everyday lives, while oth ers who are labeled high functioning may be experiencing unemployment and friendless Bess.

New Outcome for Life Experience In recent years, scientific research has focused more on person-centered outcomes and quality of life. The latter in particular has repeatedly been defined as an essential compo Bent in the intervention planning and evaluation of intellectual disability and autism spec rum disorder, where the recovering of neuropsychic functions cannot be pursued as in other mental or physical conditions in the general population.

Quality of life evaluation aims at identify how the individual might achieve a satisfying life and be able to participate in society, take advantage of opportunities, and have the potent ital to make independent choices. According to this approach, the quality of life model consists in the identification of a way of living and not in the attainment of a specific goal. The expression thus defines a multidimensional concept, in Solving several definitions and applications.

There is general agreement that quality of life measurement should be based on both qualitative and quantitative variables, from both subjective and objective positions. For people with intellect al disability and autism spectrum disorder the most adequate models are the “whole-per son” ones, that refer to individual complexity and not specifical ly to areas of dysfunction. A very comprehensive approach is the one proposed by the Center for Health Promotion of the University of Toronto, which in Eludes nine areas applicable to every person’s life to be defined for individual modulation by four dimensions: importance attributed, satisfaction perceived, self-determination, and opportunities. This last dimension refers to the opportunities a person has to develop im portance and to experience satisfaction. The areas are organized in three major ate Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Dories: Being (physical, psychological, and spiritual), Belonging (physical, social, and community), and Becoming (practical, leisure, and growth).

The quality of life model represents an excellent conceptual parameter in maintaining life projects of people with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder aligned with those of other people. In fact, this criterion is the sharing of the qualitative aspect of xis Fence, independently of specific psychophysical conditions.

The quality of life model has been shown to have a number of positive implica sons for care and intervention in neurodevelopmental disorders, including alleviating the care-giver burden, support, health services, and health policies. De spite this, an optimal implementation of the concept of quality of life into daily practices for the full range of cognitive impairments is yet to come, as well as a definition of its re lationship with the non-reductionistic approach of the phenomenological tradition.

The phenomenological conceptualization of neurodiversity and the quality of life perspex Dive share the same major conceptual premises, such as the centrality of the individual experience, the consideration of mic aspects of human life, or the “gestated” (articulated) being-in-the-world-with-others.

Conclusions The term “neurodiversity” is commonly used to refer to neurodevelopmental disorders, which represents a group of life-span conditions with early childhood onset, character zed by impairments of conceptual, social, and practical adaptive skills. Among these, in tellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder are the most common, connoted re spectively by cognitive and socio-emotional difficulties.

The life of a “neurodiverse” person is punctuated by subjective, practical, and social exp riences which imply a considerable difficulty in defining the width of the atypicalness of the first-person givenness and self-development over time. The daily being-in-the-world is much more challenging than for the neurotypical person, due to lack of environmental mastery, low coping abilities, communication deficits, and difficulties in self-determine son, while the environmental influence is most frequently expressed by lack of satisfacto ry social relations and practical activities, inadequate living arrangements, repeated fail res, or other negative life events and traumatic experiences. Existential issues, such as self-origin, insight, time flow, mortality, singularity, or transcendentality may be concept alized as a phenomenological reduction to the basic categories that structure our com mon human condition. Nevertheless, this “neurodiverse” perspective seems to retain some relevant utilities for life skills that the neurotypical persons increasingly seem to lose in their chaotic and high performance-requiring lives. For instance, the quality of life approach, which was originally developed for persons with ID, may in fact benefit anyone Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity wishing to define their relationship between personal attribution of importance and per caption of satisfaction toward most mic areas of life. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Hassiotis A., Serfaty M., Assam K., Martin S., Strydom A., and King M.. Manual of Cognitive Behavior Therapy for People with Mild Learning Disabilities and Common Mental Disorders. London: Camden & Islington NHS Foundation Trust and Uni varsity College.

Hastings R. P., Patton C., Taylor J. L., and Madison C.. “Life Events and Psych attic Symptoms in Adults with Intellectual Disabilities.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 48: 42–46.

Patton C. and Emerson E.. “The Relationship Between Life Events and Psy chopathology Amongst Children with Intellectual Disabilities.” Journal of Applied Re search in Intellectual Disabilities 17: 109–117.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Lemmings C. P., Gravestock S., Packard M., and Bouras N.. “Psychiatric Symptoms and Problem Behaviors in People with Intellectual Disabilities.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 50: 269–276.

Hendricks D. R. and Lehman P.. “Transition from School to Adulthood for Youth with Autism Spectrum Disorders: Review and Recommendations.” Focus On Autism And Other Developmental Disabilities 24: 77–88.

Hodapp R. M., Dykes E. M., Ort S. I., Zelinsky D. G., and Beckman J. F.. “Chang ing Patterns of Intellectual Strengths and Weaknesses in Males with Fragile tenth Syn dome.” Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 21: 503–516.

Holdnack J. A., Chou tenth., Larrabee G. J., Willis S. R., and Salthouse T. A.. “Confirm Cory Factor Analysis of the WAIS-fourth/WMS-fourth.” Assessment 18: 178–191.

Collins S., Attar M. T., von Fraunhofer N., and Sedgwick P.. “Mortality in People with Learning Disability: Risks, Causes, and Death Certification Findings in London.” De velopmental Medicine & Child Neurology 40: 50–56.

Hurley A.. “Mood Disorders in Intellectual Disability.” Current Opinion in Psychic try 19: 465–469.

Imam S. S., Abdul Kareem N. H., Jusoh N. R., and Mama N. E.. “Malay Version Of Spiritual Well-Being Scale: Is Malay Spiritual Well-being Scale a Psychometrically Sound Instrument?” The Journal of Behavioral Science 4: 59–69.

Jacobson J. W. and Mulik J. A.. “Definition of Mental Retardation.” In American Psy chological Association (ed.), Manual of Diagnosis and Professional Practice in Mental Re tardation. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Jahoda A., Pert C., and Rower P.. “Socioemotional Understanding And Frequent Aggression in People with Mild to Moderate Intellectual Disabilities.” American Journal on Mental Retardation 111: 77–89.

Janicki M. P. and Jacobson J. W.. “Generation Trends in Sensory, Physical, and Be havioral Abilities Among Older Mentally Retarded Persons.” American Journal on Mental Retardation 90: 490–500.

Janicki M. P. and Dalton A. J.. “Prevalence of Dementia and Impact on Intellectual Disability Services.” Mental Retardation 38: 276–288.

Johnson K., Hillier L., Harrison L.,and Frawley P.. Living Safer Sex Lives. Final Re port. Melbourne: Australian Research Center in Sex, Health and Society, La Robe Univer City, Melbourne.

Opp D. A. and Keys C. B.. “Diagnostic Overshadowing Reviewed and Reconsid red.” American Journal of Mental Retardation 106: 416–433.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Banner L.. “Autistic Disturbances of Effective Contact.” Nervous Child 2: 217–250.

Kapell D., Nightingale B., Rodriguez A., Lee J. H., Zigman W. B., and Schupf N.. “Prevalence of Chronic Medical Conditions in Adults with Mental Retardation: Compare son with the General Population.” Mental Retardation 36: 269–279.

Kishore M. T., Nizamie S. H., and Nizamie A.. “The Behavioral Profile of Psychiatric Disorders in Persons with Intellectual Disability.” Journal of Intellectual Dis ability Research 49: 852–857.

Korff-Sausse S. and Scelles R.. The Clinic of Disability. Psychoanalytical Approach es. London: Karnac.

Koskentausta T., Iivanien M., and Almqvist F.. “Risk Factors for Psychiatric Disturb Dance in Children with Intellectual Disability.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 51: 43–53.

Lee E. K. O. and Oh H.. “Marital Satisfaction Among Adults with Disabilities in South Korea.” Journal of Disability Policy Studies 23: 215–224.

Liégeois A.. “Quality of Life without Spirituality? A Theological Reflection on the Quality of Life of Persons with Intellectual Disabilities.” Journal of Disability & Religion 18: 303–317.

Lindsay P. and Burgess D.. “Care of Patients with Intellectual or Learning Disabili ty in Primary Care: No More Funding So Will There Be Any Change?” The British Journal of General Practice 56: 84–86.

Lindsay W. R., Allan R., Parry C., Macleod F., Cottrell J., Overend H., and Smith A. H. W.. “Anger and Aggression in People with Intellectual Disabilities: Treatment and Fol low-up of Consecutive Referrals and a Waiting List Comparison.” Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy 11: 255–264.

Loveland K. A. and Kelly M. L.. “Development of Adaptive Behavior in Preschool ers with Autism or Down Syndrome.” American Journal on Mental Retardation 96: 13– 20.

Lumley fifth. A. and Scotch J. R.. “Supporting the Sexuality of Adults with Mental Re tardation: Current Status and Future Directions.” Journal of Positive Behavior Intervene sons 3: 109–119.

Matheson E. and Jahoda A.. “Emotional Understanding in Aggressive and Nona gressive Individuals with Mild or Moderate Mental Retardation.” American Journal on Mental Retardation 110: 57–67.

Mattila J., Määttä K., and Uusiautti S.. “Everyone Needs Love”—An Interview Study About Perceptions of Love in People with Intellectual Disability (ID).” International Journal of Adolescence and Youth 22: 296–307.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity McCarthy J.. “Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders and Intellectual Disabili ty.” Current Opinion in Psychiatry 20: 472–476.

McGrew K. S.. “The Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) Theory of Cognitive Abilities: Past, Present and Future.” In P. Flanagan, J. L. Genshaft, and P. L. Harrison (eating disorders.), Contempt Cary Intellectual Assessment: Theories, Tests, and Issues, 2nd edn, pp. 136–202. New York: Guilford Press.

Medford H. C., Batshaw M. L., and Hoffman E. P.. “Genomics, Intellectual Disabili ty, and Autism.” The New England Journal of Medicine 366: 733–743.

Hinton C. A. and Dodder R. A.. “Participation in Religious Services by People with Developmental Disabilities.” Mental Retardation 41: 430–439.

Moore D. G.. “Reassessing Emotion Recognition Performance in People with Men tal Retardation: A Review.” American Journal on Mental Retardation 106: 481–502.

Morgan C. N., Roy M., Nair A., Chance P., Hand M., Mlle T., and Roy A.. “A Com unity Study Establishing the Prevalence Rate of Autistic Disorder in Adults with Learn ing Disability.” Psychiatric Bulletin 26: 127–129.

Moss S., Emerson E., Kiernan C. K., Turner S., Patton C., and Alborz A.. “Psychiatric Symptoms in Adults with Learning Disability and Challenging Behavior. ” British Journal of Psychiatry 177: 452–456.

Murray S. and Powell A.. Sexual Assault and Adults with a Disability: Enabling Recognition, Disclosure and a Just Response. Canberra: Australian Institute of Family Studies.

Naglieri J. A. and Das J. P.. “Practical Implications of General Intelligence and Pass Cognitive Processes.” In R. Sternberg and E. Grigorenko (eating disorders.), The General Factor of In telligence. How General is It? pp. 55–84. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

National Disability Authority (NDA).. Independent and Community Living: Focus Group Consultation Report; dent-and-Community-Living-Focus-Group-Consultation-Report/Chapter-Two-Theviews-and-experiences-of-people-with-intellectual-disabilities (l.a. 08/18/2018)

Newschaffer C. J., Creon L. A., Daniels J., Giarelli E., Grether J. K., Levy S. E., Randell D. S., Miller L. A., Pinto-Martin J., Heaven J., Reynolds A. M., Rice C. E., Schendel D., and Windham G. C.. “The Epidemiology of Autism Spectrum Disorders.” Annual Review of Public Health 28: 235–258.

Noterdaeme M. A. and Hutzelmeyer-Nickels A.. “Comorbidity in Autism Spectrum Disorders—second. Genetic Syndromes and Neurological Problems.” Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr Psychother 38: 67–72.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Noterdaeme M. A. and Wriedt E.. “Comorbidity in Autism Spectrum Disorders—I. Mental Retardation and Psychiatric Comorbidity.” Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr Psychother 38: 257–266.

Oakland T. and Harrison P.. Adaptive Behavior Assessment System-second: Behavior As sessment System-second: Clinical Use and Interpretation. New York: Elsevier.

O’Condor M. and Fawkes J.. Normal is Everyone: Some of Us Have a Learning Dif faculty. Nundah, Brisbane: Community Living Association Inc.

Owen M. J.. “Intellectual Disability and Major Psychiatric Disorders: A Continuum of Neurodevelopmental Causality.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 200: 268–269.

Owen A., Browning M., and Jones R. P.. “Emotion Recognition in Adults with Mild– Moderate Learning Disabilities.” Journal of Learning Disabilities 5: 267–281.

Owen D. M., Hastings R. P., Boone S. J., Chin J., Barman K., Roberts J., and Taylor K.. “Life Events as Correlates of Problem Behavior and Mental Health in a Reside ital Population of Adults with Developmental Disabilities.” Research in Developmental Disabilities 25: 309–320.

Pan C. C., Davis R., Nichols D., Twang S. H., and Hsieh K.. “Prevalence of Over weight and Obesity Among Students with Intellectual Disabilities in Taiwan: A Secondary Analysis.” Research in Developmental Disabilities 53–54: 305–313.

Puree B. K., Leah S. K., Manga A., Haman R., and Singh I.. “Mortality in a Hospital zed Mentally Handicapped Population: A 10-year Survey.” Journal of Intellectual Disabili ty Research 39: 442–446.

Raitasuo J., Raitasuo S., Mattila K., and Mölsä P.. “Deaths Anions Intellectually Dis bled: A Retrospective Study.” Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities 10: 280–288.

Radii O.. “Intellectual Disability.” In C. Cook, A. Powell, A. Sims (eating disorders.), Spirituality and Psychiatry, pp. 122–138. Glasgow: The Royal College of Psychiatrists.

Weiss S., Levtan G. W., and Szyszko J.. “Emotional Disturbance and Mental Retardation: Diagnostic Overshadowing.” American Journal of Mental Deficiency 86: 567– 574.

Weiss S. and Syszko J.. “Diagnostic Overshadowing and Professional Experience with Mentally Retarded Persons.” American Journal of Mental Deficiency 87: 396–402.

Rojahn J., Watson J. L., Naglieri J. A., and Mayville E.. “Relationships Between Psy chiatric Conditions and Behavior Problems Among Adults with Mental Retardation.” American Journal of Mental Retardation 109: 21–33.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Rojahn J. and Meier L. J.. “Epidemiology of Mental Illness and Maladaptive Behan ior in Intellectual Disabilities.” In M. H. Robert (ed.), International Review of Research in Mental Retardation, pp. 38, 239–287). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Rondini E.. Fattori socio-ambientali e disabilityà intellettiva: studio di relazione in un’Attica dimensional. (Unpublished Thesis) University of Florence.

Rose J. and West C.. “Assessment of Anger in People with Intellectual Disabilities.” Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities 12: 211–224.

Salvador-Carulla L. and Saxena S.. “Intellectual Disability: Between Disability and Clinical Nosology.” Lancet 374: 1798–1799.

Salvador-Carulla L., Reed G. M., Baez-Azizi L. M., Cooper S. A., Martinez-Deal R., Bertelli M., Adams C., Hooray S., Deb S., Akoury-Dirani L., Girimaji S. C., Kate G., Wok H., Luckasson R., Simeonsson R., Walsh C., Muir K., and Saxena S.. “Intellectual De velopmental Disorders: Towards a New Name, Definition and Framework for “Mental Re tardation/Intellectual Disability” in ICD-11. World Psychiatry 10: 175–180.

Sappok T., Barrett B. F., Vandevelde S., Heinrich M., Pope L., Sterkenburg P., Bonk J., Kalb J., Clues C., Bergman T., Došen A., and Morisse F.. “Scale of Emotional De velopment-Short.” Research in Developmental Disabilities 59: 166–175.

Schlock R. L.. “The Merging of Adaptive Behavior and Intelligence: Implication for the Field of Mental Retardation.” In R. L. Schlock and D. L. Braddock (eating disorders.), Adaptive Behavior and Its Measurement. Washington, DC: American Association on Mental Rear Cation.

Schlock R. L., Brown I., Brown R., Cumming R. A., Fence D., Matikka L., Keith K. D., and Parmenter T.. “Conceptualization, Measurement, and Application of Quality of Life for Persons with Intellectual Disabilities: Report of an International Panel of Experts.” Mental Retardation 40: 457–470.

Schlock R. L., Verdugo M. A., Genaro C., Wang M., Wehmeyer M., Jiancheng tenth., and Lachapelle Y.. “Cross-cultural study of quality of life indicators.” American Journal of Mental Retardation 110:298–311.

Schlock R. L., Borthwick-Duffy S. A., Bradley M., Bunting H. E., Coulter D. L., Craig E. M. P., Gomez S. C., Lachapelle Y., Luckasson R., Reeve A., Shogren K. A., Snell M. A., Sprat S., Tassé M. J., Thompson J. R., Verdugo-Alfonso M. A., Wehmeyer M. L., and Yeager M. H.. Intellectual Disability: Definition, Classification, and Systems of Supports, 11th edn. Washington, DC: American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Dis abilities.

Scheuffgen K., Appé F., Anderson M., and Firth U.. “High ‘Intelligence,’ Low ‘IQ’? Speed of Processing and Measured IQ in Children with Autism.” Developmental Psy chopathology 12: 83–90.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Scott H. M. and Havercamp S. M.. “Mental Health for People with Intellectual Dis ability: The Impact of Stress and Social Support.” American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities 119: 552–564.

Seltzer M. M., Floyd F., Greenberg J., Bounds J., Lindstromm M., and Hong J.. “Life Course Impacts of Mild Intellectual Deficits.” American Journal of Mental Retardation 110: 451–468.

Seaway D. and Ashcan A. F.. “Disability, Religion and Health: A Literature Review in Search of the Spiritual Dimensions of Disability.” Disability & Society 13: 429–439.

Simon T. J.. “Rewards and Challenges of Cognitive Neuroscience Studies of Per sons with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities.” American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities 115: 79–82.

Sinason fifth.. Mental Handicap and the Human Condition. New Approaches from the Tavistock. Free Association Books: London.

Sobsey D.. Violence and Abuse in the Lives of People with Disabilities: The End of Silent Acceptance? Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.

Sooner R.. “Limiting Factors in the Use of DSM-third Criteria with Mentally Ill/Men tally Retarded Persons.” Psychopharmacology Bulletin 22: 1055–1059.

Sparrow S. S., Cicchetti D. fifth., and Calla D. A.. Vineland second Adaptive Behavior Scales. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.

Srivastava A. K. and Schwartz C. E.. “Intellectual Disability and Autism Spectrum Disorders: Causal Genes and Molecular Mechanisms.” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review 46: 161–174.

Stanghellini G.. “A Future for Phenomenology?” Comprendre 13.

Sturmey P. and Ley T.. “The Psychopathology Instrument for Mentally Retarded Adults. Internal Consistencies and Relationship to Behavior Problems.” British Journal of Psychiatry 156: 428–430.

Sulmasy D. P.. The Healer’s Calling: A Spirituality for Physicians and Other Health Care Professionals. New York: Paulist Press.

Summers J. A., Boston D. J., Turnbull A. P., Marquis J., Hoffman L., Manna H., and Wang M.. “Conceptualizing and Measuring Family Quality of Life.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 49: 777–783.

Tamara K. and Condo T.. “Autism Spectrum Disorder Among First-Visit Depressed Adult Patients: Diagnostic Clues from Backgrounds and Past History.” General Hospital Psychiatry 36: 737–742.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Thompson J. R., McGrew K. S., and Bruininks R. H.. “Adaptive and Maladaptive Be Savior: Functional and Structural Characteristics.” In R. L. Schlock (ed.), Adaptive Be haviour and Its Measurement. Washington, DC: American Association on Mental Retard son.

Thornton-Wells T. A., Cannistraci C. J., Anderson A. W., Kim C. Y., Eaten M., Gore J. C., Blake R., and Dykes E. M.. “Auditory attraction: activation of visual cortex by mu sic and sound in Williams syndrome.” American Journal on Intellectual and Development tal Disabilities 115:172–189.

Tiekstra M., Vessels M. G., and Minnaert A. E.. “Learning Capacity in Adolescents with Mild Intellectual Disabilities.” Psychological Report 105: 804–814.

Tsiouris J. A., Mann R., Patti P. J., and Sturmey P.. “Challenging Behaviors Should Not Be Considered as Depressive Equivalents in Individuals with Intellectual Disability.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 47: 14–21.

van Schrojenstein Lantman-De Balk H. M. J., Metsemakers J. F. M., Caveman M. J., and Crebolder H. F. J. M.. “Health Problems in People with Intellectual Disability in General Practice: A Comparative Study.” Family Practice 17: 405–407.

Verdonschot M. M. L., de Witch L. P., Reichrath E., Bunting W. H. E., and Surfs L. M. G.. “Impact of Environmental Factors on Community Participation of Persons with an Intellectual Disability: A Systematic Review.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Re search 53: 54–64.

Verdugo M. A., Schlock R. L., Keith K. D., and Stancliffe R. J.. “Quality of Life and Its Measurement: Important Principles and Guidelines.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 49: 707–717.

Watts G.. “Intellectual Disability and Spiritual Development.” Journal on Intellect al and Developmental Disabilities 36: 234–241.

WHO—World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification of Dis eases and Related Health Problems—10th revision, ICD-10. Geneva: World Health Organ Cation.

WHO—World Health Organization. Aging and Intellectual Disabilities—Improving Longevity and Promoting Healthy Aging: Summative Report. Geneva: World Health Or ganisation.

WHO—World Health Organization. International Classification of Functioning, Dis ability and Health (ICF). Geneva: World Health Organization.

WHO—World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification of Dis eases and Related Health Problems—11th revision, ICD-11 Beta draft. https:// Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity icd.who.int/dev11/l-m/en#/ http%3a%2f%2fid.who.int%2ficd%2fentity%2f605267007 (l.a. 2/5/18)

Widaman K. F., Gibbs K. W., and Deary D. C.. “Structure of Adaptive Behavior: I Replication Across Fourteen Samples of Nonprofoundly Mentally Retarded People.” Amer can Journal of Mental Deficiency 91: 348–360.

Wilkins J. and Watson J. L.. “A Comparison of Social Skills Profiles in Intellectually Disabled Adults with and without autism spectrum disorder.” Behavior Modification 33: 143–155.

Wilson N. J., Jacques H., Johnson A., and Brotherton M. L.. “From Social Exclusion to Supported Inclusion: Adults with Intellectual Disability Discuss Their Lived Expert Fences of a Structured Social Group.” Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabili ties 30: 847–858.

Wing L., Gould J., and Gillberg C.. “Autism Spectrum Disorders in the DSM-fifth: Bet ter or Worse than the DSM-fourth?” Research in Developmental Disabilities 32: 768–773.

Wishart J. G., Nebula K. R., Willis D. S., and Pitcairn T. K.. “Understanding of Facial Expressions of Emotion by Children with Intellectual Disabilities of Differing Etiology.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 51: 551–563.

WWILD Sexual Violence Prevention Association Inc.. How to Hear Me: A Resource Kit for Counselors and Other Professionals Working with People with Intellectual Disabil ity; source-kit-for-working-with-people-with-intellect-14 (l.a. 08/18/2018)

Hang K. C.. “Spirituality and Disabilities: Implications for Special Education.” In tellectual and Developmental Disabilities 48: 299–302.

Zic A. and Lyric L.. “Self-assessment of Relationships with Peers in Children with Intellectual Disability.” Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 45: 202–211.

Notes:

1 ( ) For further reflections on Bleuler’s conception of autism see Gimps and de Naan, this volume.

Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Marco O. Bertelli CREA (Research and Clinical Center), San Sebastian Foundation, Florence, Italy Cohan De Grief VZW Zonnelied Elisa Rondini CREA (Research and Clinical Center), San Sebastian Foundation, Florence, Italy Phenomenological Psychopathology of Neurodiversity Marco O. Bertelli CREA (Research and Clinical Center), San Sebastian Foundation, Florence, Italy Cohan De Grief VZW Zonnelied Elisa Rondini CREA (Research and Clinical Center), San Sebastian Foundation, Florence, Italy The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience Francesca Jerri and Vittorio Gallese The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind Online Publication Date: Aug 2018 DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803157.013.

Abstract and Keywords This chapter illustrates the most recent empirical evidence of anomalies of body expert Fences in schizophrenia and schizotypy, with a specific focus on body ownership, sense of agency, and self-other boundary. The authors link these anomalies of body experiences to a reduced temporal sensitivity of multisensory processing, as indexed by an abnormally wide temporal binding window, which has been reported in both schizophrenia and schizotypy. Then, the authors propose specific neurobiological markers possibly associate ed with temporal anomalies of multisensory processing and, consequently, body expert Fences in schizophrenia and schizotypy. They refer specifically to the role of disorganized patterns of spontaneous brain activity, and the underlying excitation/inhibition imbalance, as a possible key to understanding anomalies of bodily-self experiences in self-disorders.

Keywords: bodily self, schizophrenia, schizotypy, body ownership, sense of agency, self-other boundary, multisen Cory processing, temporal binding window, excitation/inhibition imbalance, neurobiological markers # The Body and the Self SEVERAL philosophers, psychologists, and neuroscientists suggested that the self is fun damentally shaped by the body. Hence, the bodily self would represent the most basic aspect of our self. Despite a wider range of body experiences likely participant ing in the constitution of the self, the most recognized contributions are from the sense of body ownership (i.e. the feeling that “my body” belongs to me ) and the sense of agency (i.e. the feeling that “my actions” belong to me ). Psychologists and neuroscientists proposed that altogether these major dimensions of bodily self-awareness account for the multisensory and sensorimotor bases of the self.

The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience Interestingly, the last several years have seen a tremendous growth in the study of atom aloes body experiences in self-disorders, especially schizophrenia. The conceptual framework behind this new empirical trend, which emerged after prolonged research focusing on higher-order cognitive functions (e.g. executive function, working memory), is provided by phenomenological psychopathology. The general idea is that schizophrenia is essentially characterized by deficits at the most basic level of selfexperience, ipseity, which is rooted in bodily experience. Consistent with this idea, several anomalies of the repre sensations of the bodily self have been found not only in schizophrenia, but also in individ Gals with subclinical schizotypal personality. This evidence further supports the basic role of bodily-self disturbances in schizophrenia, as they seem to precede the onset of the ill Bess. Moreover, it supports the idea that schizophrenia may exist on a dimensional contain uum with normal experience.

The first part of this chapter will illustrate the most recent empirical evidence of anomalies of body experiences in schizophrenia and schizotypy. The second part of the chapter will propose a link between bodily-self disturbances and deficits in time-process ing that have been shown in both populations.

What sorts of mechanisms underlie anomalies of body experiences in self-disorders? The third part of the chapter will tackle this issue by illustrating neural markers possibly Basso sated with anomalies of time-processing and, as a consequence, with abnormal represent Cations of the bodily self, in self-disorders. Specifically, we will illustrate how abnormal temporal patterns of the spontaneous brain activity may underlie deficits in the multisen Cory processes at the heart of the representations of the bodily self. Finally, we will refer to excitation/inhibition imbalance as a possible key to understanding the different neural markers of anomalies of bodily-self experiences in self-disorders.

Phenomenological Phenotype of Schizophre # nia Spectrum Disorders Abnormal experiences of self, or self-disorders, constitute a crucial schizophrenia spec rum phenotype. Self-disorders are thought to originate at the most “basic” level of self-awareness, that is, “ipseity”, which is rooted in bodily experiences. Disturbances of bodily experiences seem to precede the onset of the illness and include, for instance, body alienation, loss of agency, and blurred body boundaries.

In recent years, there has been growing interest in the study of anomalous body expert Fences in schizophrenia spectrum disorders. The dimensions of the body awareness that The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience have been most extensively investigated are the sense of body ownership, the sense of agency, and self–other boundary in the domain of touch.

Body Ownership in Schizophrenia The sense of body ownership can be defined as the feeling that something is part of one’s own body. Studies investigating body ownership in patients with schizophrenia used the rubber hand illusion (RHI), which depends on the interaction between sensory inputs from three different modalities, namely vision, touch, and propri oception.

To elicit this illusion, the participant’s real hand is hidden from view while a rubber hand is placed in front of her. The experimenter generally uses two paintbrushes to stroke syn chronously the rubber hand and the participant’s hidden hand. After a short period (about 30 seconds), most people have the experience that the rubber hand is their own hand and that it is the rubber hand that senses the touch of the paintbrush. In the control condition, the rubber hand and the participant’s hidden hand are stroked asynchronously. Strength of the RHI has traditionally been measured in three ways. First, using introspect Dive questionnaires that assess four dissociable components of the RHI experience, name ly, embodiment of the rubber hand (with the agency, ownership, and location components), loss of the own hand, movement, and affect. Second, with the proprioceptive drift, that quantifies the feeling of relocalization of participant’s hand toward the location of the rubber hand. Third, with skin conductance response. The RHI is typically measured on the basis of the difference between the ratings, or measures, after synchro nous and asynchronous stimulation. Importantly, conclusions about the experience of ownership cannot be drawn from measuring proprioceptive drift alone, as recent studies indicate that a dissociation between subjective ratings and drift exists.

People with schizophrenia have been shown to experience the RHI more strongly and faster than healthy controls, as indicated by self-report questionnaires. However, the authors of these studies only administered synchronous stimulation, thus providing only partial evidence of body ownership deficits in patients with schizophrenia. In a more recent study, Thakkar and colleagues Ample Dented both the synchronous and the asynchronous conditions and measured the illusion with both subjective (e.g. questionnaire) and objective (e.g. proprioceptive drift, autonomy ic responses) methods. With respect to the subjective measures, they found stronger RHI during synchronous stimulation in both healthy controls and patients. However, patients endorsed RHI-related perceptual effects more strongly than controls in both synchronous and asynchronous conditions. In regard to the objective measures, Thakkar and col leagues found larger proprioceptive drift in the synchronous, as compared to the asynchronous, condition in patients with schizophrenia, but not in the The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience control group. Finally, with respect to the autonomic measures, the authors dissociative identity disorder not find an effect of synchrony. Altogether, in agreement with previous investigations, the authors conclude embodiment of the RHI to be stronger in people with schizophrenia than in healthy controls. Interestingly, similar results have been found after inducing schizophrenia symptoms with ketamine, a noncompetitive N -methyl- D -aspartame agonist, in healthy volunteers. Also in this case, subjective experience of RHI was greater under ketamine, compared to placebo, for both synchronous and asynchronous stroking. On the basis of prior evidence showing that RHI is associated with augmented gamma-band oscillations during synchronous visuo-tac tile stimulation, and that gamma-band oscilla sons are enhanced by acute ketamine administration, the authors sug Bested that during asynchronous stimulation, a ketamine-induced augmentation of gam ma-band oscillation is likely sufficient to produce the illusion. As gamma oscillations are known to emerge from the coordinated interaction of excitation and inhibition, this explanation would particularly fit with the conceptualization of schizophrenia as a disorder associated with disturbances in excitation/inhibition balance. See also the last part of this chapter on the neurobiological markers of abnormal temporal processing underlying bodily-self disorders.

Altogether, by showing the illusion also under asynchronous visuo-tactile stimulation, studies of sense of body ownership in schizophrenia suggest that patients are character zed by an increased cross-modal binding, which likely exceeds the temporal rules of mul tisensory integration. Further support to this hypothesis, which however needs to be confirmed with more studies, comes from a study from our group that used a RHI induction procedure in which no synchronous/ asynchronous visuo-tactile stimuli were delivered. In that study, multisensory integration was elicited only by anticipation of touch experience (see in, and people with schizophrenia showed weaker, rather than stronger RHI, compared to the healthy control group.

Sense of Agency in Schizophrenia Another dimension of body awareness that has been extensively investigated in schizo phrenia is the sense of agency, which refers to the feeling of being in control over one’s own actions and their consequences. An interesting distinction has been drawn between the feeling of agency (FOA) and the judgment of agency (JOA). The FOA refers to a non-conceptual feeling of being an agent, which is linked to low-level sen sorimotor processes—that is, the FOA automatically registers agency or non-agency by tracking sensorimotor contingencies. Differently, the JOA refers to a higher-level concept Dual judgment of agency, which arises in situations where we make explicit attributions of agency to the self or other—that is, the JOA is mainly based on causal attribution process es, rather than sensorimotor process. Consistently with the distinction between FOA and JOA, measures of sense of agency can be implicit or explicit. In implicit experimental paradigms, participants are never asked to directly judge their agentic ex The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience perience. Examples of implicit measures are the intentional binding and the sensory attenuation. The intentional binding evaluates the reduction of the perceived time between a voluntary action and its effect. Differently, the sensory attenuation measures the reduction in perceived intensity of sensory feedback of voluntary action, which is known to be lower than for passive movements. In explicit experimental paradigm, on the other hand, participants are directly asked to report something about their agentic experience. Examples of explicit measures are action recognition judgments, action monitoring tasks, and causal jug Bents during action recognition judgments, participants make an action and observe some kind of feedback on a screen that, importantly, leaves uncertainty over the agent of the action. They are asked whose movement it is. Action monitoring tasks also use visual feedback about move Bents, but participants are required to make a judgment about the feedback itself. Finally, in causal judgment, participants have to judge how much they felt their action caused the outcome.

In schizophrenia, abnormal experiences of agency usually take the form of passivity symptoms (or delusions of control), with the patient feeling as though his or her actions are not under their control. Most interestingly, agency problems in people with schizo phrenia concern not only high-level cognitive processes, like those revealed by action recognition tasks. Indeed, patients already have problems with lowlevel sensorimotor processes, as revealed by intentional binding and sensory attenuation tasks, both suggesting that patients struggle predicting the sensory consequences of their actions.

In particular, it was demonstrated that people with schizophrenia show greater levels of intentional binding—that is, a bigger shift of the perceived time of voluntary action to ward a subsequent tone—compared to controls. This suggested an enhanced, rather than reduced, sense of agency in patients. The relationship between intentional binding and sense of agency indicates a tight link between temporal processing of our actions and our sense of being the au tors of these actions. This is also supported by evidence that key neurotransmitters that are altered in schizophrenia, such as dopamine and glutamate, are also implicated in tim ing and sense of agency. However, the nature and origins of the agency deficit in individuals with schizophrenia still need to be clarified.

A possible explanation could be based on the observation that, in healthy people, the shift in perceived time of action toward the outcome is partly linked to sensory prediction, as it occurs only when the outcome of the action is highly predictable. However, Boss et al. demonstrated that this predictive effect is absent in patients with schizophrenia, who show a shift in perceived time of action regardless of The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience the predictability of the outcome. Furthermore, Graham-Schmidt et al. suggested more recently that the relationships between sensorimotor prediction and time shift per caption in patients with schizophrenia might be further complicated by their passivity symptoms profile.

In sum, we still don’t know how dysfunctions of time perception and processing might affect motor planning, self-monitoring processes, and copse quently sense of agency in patients with schizophrenia. Ultimately, by affecting the sense of self at such a basic and pre-reflective level, timing dysfunction might interfere also with the sensorimotor representation of the bodily self—that is, the immediate and implic it representation of oneself as a body with specific sensorimotor capacities for reviews)—that is, likely linked to social deficit.

Self–Other Boundary in Schizophrenia: The Case of Touch One of the novel contributions of neuroscience to psychopathology consisted in showing how much subjectivity and intersubjectivity be closely intertwined, allowing new light to be shed on the neurobiological mechanisms underpinning the link between the social deficits of patients with schizophrenia and their self-disorders. It should be added that so far, the exact nature and the dysfunctional neural mechanisms underlying social deficits in schizophrenia remain a topic of speculation. Research from our group has shown that by means of embodied simulation, conceived of in terms of neural reuse, that is, by map ping others’ actions, emotions, and sensations onto one’s own sensorimotor and viscera motor representations in bodily format of the same actions, emotions, and sensations, a pre-reflective, experiential understanding of others can be accomplished, so that others are conceived as other bodily selves.

However, in spite of shared representations generating vicarious experiences of others, a clear distinction between self and other is normally preserved. A brain imaging study from our group revealed significant differences in posterior insular cortex between the participants with schizophrenia and the healthy individuals during the observation of Effective social touch, either with a positive (caress) or with a neg Dative (hit) valence. Reduced deactivation of posterior insular cortex in patients with schizo ophrenia when witnessing others’ tactile experiences indicates a deficit in the pre-reflex Dive suppression of self-oriented Effective arousal. This suppression likely normally con tributes to the differentiation between self and other during social interactions.

A further difference between patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls revealed by the study of Ebisch at al. (2013 ) consisted in the reduced activation of the ventral pre motor cortex in the former group during first-person touch experience and touch observe son. The lack of coherent, pre-reflective perception of bodily experiences, likely due to al treed multisensory integration, as revealed by the hypofunction of the ventral premotor cortex in patients with schizophrenia, might lead to asymmetry in self–other relationship, accompanied by the blurring of the relationship and the distinction between self and oth er.

The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience # Bodily-Self Disturbances in Subclinical Schizo # type Several bodily-self disturbances have been found not only in schizophrenia, but also in in dividuals with subclinical schizotypal personality traits, as well as in individuals at ultra-high risk of psy chosis. This supports the idea that bodily-self disturbances may pre cede the onset of the illness and play a basic role in schizophrenia spectrum disorders.

Schizotypy is thought to reflect the subclinical expression of the symptoms of schizophre nia in the general population and to constitute a dynamic continuum ranging from per Tonality variation to psychosis. Even if most schizotypes are not expected to develop psychosis, schizotypy is associated with heightened risk for the development of psychotic disorders. Indeed, substantial overlapping has been found between schizotypy and schizophrenia not only in terms of etiological factors—at the genetic, biological, and psychosocial levels —but also concerning a wide range of perceptu al, cognitive, and motor impairments. However, the study of bodily self-dysfunction in schizotypy offers the advantage of preventing the psychological Kari bales from being confounded by compensatory strategies, severity, distress, comorbidity, and therapy.

Abnormal sense of body ownership has been revealed also in schizotypy by the rubber hand illusion. Participants with higher levels of schizotypy developed a stronger feeling that the rubber hand be longed to them. However, as with patients with schizophrenia (see earlier in the chapter), participants with higher levels of schizotypy showed increased proneness to the illusion also during asynchronous stimulation (i.e. when their own hand and the artificial hand were touched asynchronously). Moreover, positive (e.g. ideas of reference, magical think ing, unusual perceptual experiences) and negative schizotypy symptoms (social anxiety, constricted affect) in otherwise healthy individuals correlate with a greater susceptibility to illusions of body ownership during both synchronous and syn chronous conditions. In sum, studies of sense of body ownership in schizotypy, consistently with similar studies in schizophrenia, suggest that patients are characterized by an increased cross-modal binding. Moreover, such increased crossmodal binding likely exceeds the temporal rules of multisensory integration already in participants with high levels of schizotypal traits, as they show the il Fusion also under asynchronous visuo-tactile stimulation, like people with schizophrenia.

Evidence of agency disturbances in schizotypy is still inconclusive. Only one study invest gated the sense of agency in highly schizotypal individuals. Partici pants were required to judge whether they felt they or someone else had generated a tone. The results showed that the high schizotypal individuals (n=10) had a weaker sense The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience of self-agency than the low schizotypal individuals (n=8). However, given the small num ber of participants, the findings should be regarded as preliminary. Also, the fact that schizotypal people have a weaker sense of self-agency seems to contrast with evidence of stronger sense of self-agency in schizophrenia patients. Further studies on self-agency us ing the same tasks in both schizotypy, or other antecedents (e.g. ultra-high-risk state), and schizophrenia are warranted.

Bodily-Self Disturbances and Abnormal Tempo # ral Binding of Multisensory Events Body Ownership and Temporal Binding Window Multisensory integration is generally regarded as a crucial component in coherent bodily self-representation and sense of body ownership. As noted above, the fact that both peo ple with schizophrenia and schizotypal individuals show the rubber hand illusion also un der asynchronous visuo-tactile stimulation suggests that abnormal sense of body owner ship in both populations might specifically depend upon anomalous temporal binding of multisensory stimuli. Recent studies in patients with schizophrenia clearly support this hypothesis. Graham and colleagues investigated body ownership in patients with schizophrenia with current, past, and no history of passivity symptoms. Instead of a rubber hand, they used a projected hand illusion, in which a live video image of the participant’s hand is projected onto a video screen. The clinical sub-group with passivity symptoms continued to experience ownership over the projected hand during asynchronous stimulation (500 milliseconds de lay). This may suggest that the temporal binding window, which allows integration of the bodily and external stimuli, is “wider” in patients with current passivity symptoms. Copse quently, they experience stimuli that are further apart in time, as co-occurring.

In support of this hypothesis, we recently provided the first comprehensive evidence of a direct link between the individual susceptibility to the rubber hand illusion and the Hindi visual temporal binding window, measured as the timespan within which stimuli from dif ferment modalities are perceived as simultaneously occurring and, thus, perceptually bound. In particular, we showed that the larger the temporal binding window, the higher the level of synchrony tolerated in the rubber hand illusion. In other words, the degree of temporal synchrony necessary to prevent the induction of the rubber hand il Fusion depends upon the individuals’ sensitivity to perceiving synchrony during visuotactile stimulation.

Agency and Temporal Binding Window Other evidence suggesting that bodily-self disturbances on the schizophrenia spectrum might depend upon altered time-processing, especially a wider window of temporal bind ing, comes from studies on the sense-of-agency. People with schizophrenia seem to per cave events—that is, action and their consequences—as happening closer in time than The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience they actually occurred. In other words, as reported earlier, these people show greater lev els of intentional binding, which means enhanced sense-of-agency. The tendency to bind events that are further apart in time may affect the ability to form causal mental relationships and a variety of other processes related to sensory-motor awareness and, consequently, self-recognition. Despite there being enough empirical support to knowledge of abnormally wide temporal binding window in schizophrenia and schizo type, evidence of a direct link between the larger temporal binding win dow and the higher level of sense-of-agency is currently missing.

The temporal binding window has been measured in schizophrenia and schizotypy using simultaneity judgments (SJ) and temporal-order judgments (TOJ). In the SJ task two sim uli from different sensory modalities are presented either successively or simultaneously and the participant has to decide whether the onsets of the two stimuli were synchronous or asynchronous. The larger the simultaneity threshold, the lower the precision of the participant’s judgments, the lower the temporal resolution of the sensory systems. In the TOJ task two different stimuli (e.g. a tone and a flash) are presented successively, and the participant has to indicate which stimulus was presented first. The larger the threshold that is sufficient to discriminate the temporal order of two stimuli, the worse is the temporal resolution of the sensory system. The fact that a larger temporal binding window characterizes not only people with schizophrenia, but al so individuals at higher risk (e.g. those with subclinical schizotypal personality traits), is consistent with the idea that abnormal temporal processing in these people might con tribute to the development of bodily-self disturbance, which indeed are thought to pre cede the onset of psychosis and persist after remission of a frank psychotic episode.

The temporal binding window has been measured in schizophrenia and schizotypy using simultaneity judgments (SJ) and temporal-order judgments (TOJ). In the SJ task two sim uli from different sensory modalities are presented either successively or simultaneously and the participant has to decide whether the onsets of the two stimuli were synchronous or asynchronous. The larger the simultaneity threshold, the lower the precision of the participant’s judgments, the lower the temporal resolution of the sensory systems. In the TOJ task two different stimuli (e.g. a tone and a flash) are presented successively, and the participant has to indicate which stimulus was presented first. The larger the threshold that is sufficient to discriminate the temporal order of two stimuli, the worse is the temporal resolution of the sensory system. The fact that a larger temporal binding window characterizes not only people with schizophrenia, but al so individuals at higher risk (e.g. those with subclinical schizotypal personality traits), is consistent with the idea that abnormal temporal processing in these people might con tribute to the development of bodily-self disturbance, which indeed are thought to pre cede the onset of psychosis and persist after remission of a frank psychotic episode.

For the sake of completeness, we should mention here that temporal processing is not the only one temporal dimension altered in schizophrenia. In deed, the fact that patients are less accurate than controls in estimating time duration across a wide range of tasks suggests that time perception is disturbed in schizophrenia. However, the potential relation be tween (i) deficit in time-processing (as revealed by, for instance, SJ and TOJ tasks) and time perception (as revealed by, for instance, time estimation tasks), and be tween (ii) altered time perception and bodily-self disturbance is currently under investiga son.

The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience # Neurobiological Markers of Abnormal Tempo # ral Processing Underlying Bodily-Self Visor # Hers We recently tested the hypothesis that spontaneous, or resting-state brain activity, may provide insight into an individual’s propensity to integrate multisensory information over a wide or narrow temporal window. We started from prior knowledge that spontaneous neural activity exhibits a rich temporal structure that affects the timescale over which brain regions process information from ex Vernal stimuli. More specifically, we measured the temporal structure of spontaneous neural activity, and the temporal binding window, in healthy participants with lower to higher levels of schizotypy. As a measure of the temporal structure of spontaneous neural activity, we took the degree of the long-range temporal correlations —that is, an index of the regularity of brain activity patterns over time. This index is called the power law exponent (PLE). Higher PLE values indicate stronger regularities of brain activity over time. We found lower PLE values predicting wider temporal binding windows in participants with higher levels of schizotypy. These results were consistent with prior evidence of attenuated long-range temporal correlations in pa taints with schizophrenia.

We further showed that interindividual differences in perceptual schizotypy, temporal binding window, and temporal structure of spontaneous brain activity were accounted for by the balance between excitatory (i.e. glutamatergic) and inhibitory (GABAergic) euro transmissions. The individual excitation/inhibition balance was indexed by combining ge netic information, about GABA and glutamate receptors genes, and neurochemical infer mason, about the concentrations of GABA and glutamate in the brain. For participants that are already genetically shifted toward greater inhibition, higher concentrations of glutamatergic compounds were associated with higher values of PLE, narrower temporal binding window, and lower schizotypy. In contrast, for participants that are already Benet ically shifted toward greater excitation, higher concentrations of glutamatergic com pounds were associated with lower PLE, wider temporal binding window, and higher schizotypy. This interaction pattern is consistent with recent studies, which describe the relationship between excitation/inhibition balance and information processing efficiency as an inverted U-shaped curve. Indeed, higher concentrations of glutamatergic compounds in participants with an “excited” ge netic background might worsen behavioral efficiency—for example, integration of events that are further apart in time—leading to disturbances of body ownership (i.e. higher proneness to body illusions) and agency (i.e. greater levels of intentional binding) and ul timately increase perceptual risk for schizophrenia.

Prior research on impaired excitation/inhibition balance in schizophrenia has mainly linked it to functional dysconnectivity patterns between and within brain networks. Given the relevance of The Bodily Self in Schizophrenia: From Phenomenology to Neuroscience resting state connectivity patterns between primary and multisensory brain regions to set the width of individuals’ temporal binding window, it is possible to hypothesize that im paired excitation/inhibition balance causing dysconnectivity in schizophrenia might con statute another mechanism contributing to abnormal binding of multisensory events and, consequently, to bodily-self disturbances. Further studies testing this hypothesis are war ranted.

Conclusions Self-disorders are crucial elements in the psychopathology of schizophrenia. In this chap ter, we focused specifically on bodily self-disorders—that is, disorders of the bodily repre sensation of the self, such as the sense of body ownership and agency. We reported emir cal evidence in support of the idea that both are likely linked to the temporal processing of multisensory stimuli, not only in schizophrenia but already in schizotypy. Most imper tartly, we put forward the hypothesis that, first, a wider temporal window of sensory inch ration may essentially contribute to bodily self-disorders in schizophrenia and schizo type. Second, we suggested that abnormal temporal patterns of the spontaneous brain ac tivity, associated with impairments in the excitation/inhibition balance, may represent an important neural mechanism underling abnormal sensory processing and consequently bodily self-disorders in schizophrenia and people at higher risk. PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK PAGE_BREAK Francesca Jerri Department of Psychology, University of Essex Vittorio Gallese Vittorio Gallese Department of Medicine and Surgery, Unit of Neuroscience, Univer City of Karma, Italy; Institute of Philosophy, School of Advanced Study, University of London, UK # Name Index The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: # Name Index Aardema, F. 579, 580, 581 Abbeduto, L. 1095 Abbott, S. 1092 Abercrombie, J. 568 Abraham, K. 111, 697, 758 Abrams, T. 32 Abu-Abel, A. 883 Abugel, J. 601, 845 Ach, N. K. 253 Achermann, J. C. 555 Achkova, M. 1081 Acquarini, E. 828 Eddington, J. 842, 843 Adler, A. 102 Adler, G. 835 Adriaens, P. R. 889 Agamben, G. 968 Aggernæs, A. 386 Agresti, E. 739 Ahmed, M. 1116 Aho, J. 32, 461, 462 Aho, K. A. 31, 32, 198, 461, 462, 463, 808, 809, Aishwarya, S. 277 Aiken, K. J. 1074 Ajuriaguerra, J. 513, 516 Skins, K. A. 268n Akintomide, G. S. 521 Akiskal, H. S. 634, 803, 809 Abram, F. 1 Albahari, M. 466 Albertazzi, L. 12 Alvaro, A. 914 Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Philosophy Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 Alderman, T. 843 Aledda, J. 998 Altman, A. 796 Ales Cello, A. 20 Alexander, M. 997 Alford, C. F. 84n Algren, N. 52 Allamani, A. 715 Allegranzi, P. 715 Alcott, P. 355 Alfonso-Fernandez, F. 627 Alders, G. W. 578 Alzheimer, A. 97 Amado, tenth. F. 864 Ambrosini, A. 145, 468, 806, 807, Ambrosini, E. 1114 Amo, A. W. A. 173 Anderson, I. 1033, 1034 Anderson, J. 375n Anderson, M. 1095 Andreasen, N. C. 2, 436n, 451, 452, Andrews-Hanna, J. R. 915 Angel, E. 182 Angst, J. 479, 480, 753 Angus, L. E. 1060 Angyal, A. 524 Anscombe, G. E. M. 408–9, 409n Appelbaum, P. S. 861, 862, 867–8 Aquinas, T. 20, 325 Aragon, M. 281, 954, 955, 956 Arbuckle, M. R. 1008 Aren't, H. 402 Aristotle 173, 325, 347, 389, 390, Arndt, E. 519 Arnkil, T. 139 Arrow, B. 533 Aron, R. 35 Artaud, A. 598, 600 Asia, T. 1114, 1115 Aschaffenburg, G. 640 Ashcan, A. F. 1088 Aston, A. 789 Asperger, H. 696, 697, 705, 812, Atkinson, J. R. 791 Attic, T. 542 Atwood, G. E. 896, 897, 898, 899, Augustine, St. 20 Austin, J. C. 982 Alderman, T. 843 Aledda, J. 998 Altman, A. 796 Ales Cello, A. 20 Alexander, M. 997 Alford, C. F. 84n Algren, N. 52 Allamani, A. 715 Allegranzi, P. 715 Alcott, P. 355 Alfonso-Fernandez, F. 627 Alders, G. W. 578 Alzheimer, A. 97 Amado, tenth. F. 864 Ambrosini, A. 145, 468, 806, 807, Ambrosini, E. 1114 Amo, A. W. A. 173 Anderson, I. 1033, 1034 Anderson, J. 375n Anderson, M. 1095 Andreasen, N. C. 2, 436n, 451, 452, Andrews-Hanna, J. R. 915 Angel, E. 182 Angst, J. 479, 480, 753 Angus, L. E. 1060 Angyal, A. 524 Anscombe, G. E. M. 408–9, 409n Appelbaum, P. S. 861, 862, 867–8 Aquinas, T. 20, 325 Aragon, M. 281, 954, 955, 956 Arbuckle, M. R. 1008 Aren't, H. 402 Aristotle 173, 325, 347, 389, 390, Arndt, E. 519 Arnkil, T. 139 Arrow, B. 533 Aron, R. 35 Artaud, A. 598, 600 Asia, T. 1114, 1115 Aschaffenburg, G. 640 Ashcan, A. F. 1088 Aston, A. 789 Asperger, H. 696, 697, 705, 812, Atkinson, J. R. 791 Attic, T. 542 Atwood, G. E. 896, 897, 898, 899, Augustine, St. 20 Austin, J. C. 982 809 608, 634, 860, 864, 991–2, 1033 402, 975, 976, 1070, 1071 1080 900, 904 Austin, J. L. 356, 362, 791 Wad, A. G. 829 Uzis, M. 570 Bars, B. J. 417 Backström, J. 398, 402 Beyer, W. von 157 Baillarger, J. 485 Baker, D. 571 Bakewell, S. 184 Balboni, G. 1096 Baling, M. 897 Balkoski, B. I. 805 Balkowski, fifth. I. 453 Ballerina, A. 18, 637, 736, 740, 835, 955 Ballerina, M. 355, 361, 403, 814, 849, 926, Bally, G. 115 Balzac, H. de 781 Ban, T. A. 754 Banding, E. 534 Banner, N. F. 867 Barale, F. 695, 696, 697, 704 Barbara, R. 93, 127 Barbui, C. 4 Garcia, R. 475, 476 Bardone-Cone, A. M. 531, 534, 715 Barefoot, J. C. 829 Backus, E. 790 Baron-Cohen, S. 699 Barrantes-Vidal, N. 1114 Barthes, R. 718 Basaglia, F. 91, 165–72 Basaglia Ongaro, F. 167n Ballet, G. 567 Bachelor, I. R. 424 Baumaister, R. 1109 Badman, Z. 146 Baumann, U. 754 Baumgartner, C. 566 Baxter, H. 1094 Bayer, R. 559 Beret, S. 1091 Beauchamp, T. L. 973 Beaufret, J. 346n Beauvoir, S. de 25, 42, 51–6, 184, 211, Lech, P. 437, 622 Beck, A. T. 1061 Becker, A. E. 719 Beckett, S. 184 Austin, J. L. 356, 362, 791 Wad, A. G. 829 Uzis, M. 570 Bars, B. J. 417 Backström, J. 398, 402 Beyer, W. von 157 Baillarger, J. 485 Baker, D. 571 Bakewell, S. 184 Balboni, G. 1096 Baling, M. 897 Balkoski, B. I. 805 Balkowski, fifth. I. 453 Ballerina, A. 18, 637, 736, 740, 835, 955 Ballerina, M. 355, 361, 403, 814, 849, 926, Bally, G. 115 Balzac, H. de 781 Ban, T. A. 754 Banding, E. 534 Banner, N. F. 867 Barale, F. 695, 696, 697, 704 Barbara, R. 93, 127 Barbui, C. 4 Garcia, R. 475, 476 Bardone-Cone, A. M. 531, 534, 715 Barefoot, J. C. 829 Backus, E. 790 Baron-Cohen, S. 699 Barrantes-Vidal, N. 1114 Barthes, R. 718 Basaglia, F. 91, 165–72 Basaglia Ongaro, F. 167n Ballet, G. 567 Bachelor, I. R. 424 Baumaister, R. 1109 Badman, Z. 146 Baumann, U. 754 Baumgartner, C. 566 Baxter, H. 1094 Bayer, R. 559 Beret, S. 1091 Beauchamp, T. L. 973 Beaufret, J. 346n Beauvoir, S. de 25, 42, 51–6, 184, 211, Lech, P. 437, 622 Beck, A. T. 1061 Becker, A. E. 719 Beckett, S. 184 927, 929, 931, 933, 934, 936, 937, 965 654 Beenfeldt, C. 252, 253 Behnke, E. A. 320 Bel Habit, H. 771n Bender, K. G. 521 Benedetti, G. 162 Benedict, M. 567 Beneduce, R. 173 Benjamin, W. 875 Benson, B. A. 1087 Benson, D. F. 426–7 Benson, T. L. 1114 Bentall, R. P. 863, 976 Berg, J. H. van den 550, 792, 959 Bergengrün, W. 112 Berger, P. L. 933 Berger, T. 1031 Bergson, H. 51, 57, 83, 91–2, 104–5, 106, Bringer, K. 484, 491, 492, 494, 497, 689 Jerking, M. 636 Bermúdez, J.-L. 1109 Lerner, P. 829 Benet, R. 318, 346n, 762 Bernhardt, before Christ 277 Berninger, A. 883 Barrios, G. E. 188, 281, 423, 485, 487, 519, Berry, K. 789 Bertelli, M. 1079, 1082, 1087, 1089, 1094, Berle, J. 361, 490, 491 Bettelheim, B. 695 Beveridge, A. 182 Char, S. 579 Bhugra, D. 1031 Bianchi 718 Ziegler, P. 1059n Gilder, R. M. 1095 Dillon, A. 263–4, 265, 586 Binder, H. 636–7, 640 Kinney, J. S. 989n Binswanger, L. 111 Binswanger, L. atmospheres 879 autism 385 autobiography 1053 and Basaglia 165, 166, 167, 168 and Blankenburg 159, 160, 162 and Boss 118, 119 clinical phenomenology 218, 219, 220, 221, depression 619, 624 108, 151, 162, 173, 248, 431, 495, 515, 816 608, 744 1095, 1097 222, 223 drug addiction 691, 692, 693 embodiment 371 and Foucault 90 hallucinations 484, 495, 498, 502 and Heidegger 25, 29–30, 31, and Husserl hysteria 651, 658, 660 and Jasper 96, 102 and Kimura 148 mania 627, 882, 887–8, 889 neurodiversity 1083 normality 292 overview 111–17 paranoia 781, 785, 786 personal life-history 966 phenomenological psychopathology phenomenology 927, 932 psychiatry 214 psychoanalysis 1046, 1047, 1048–9 psychopathy 882, 887–8, 889 psychosis 844 psychotherapy 214 schizophrenia 361, 403, 738–9, and Straps 126 time 394, 395 understanding 957 Binswanger, O. 111 Binswanger, R. 111 Ion, B. 1050 Birchwood, M. 500, 501, 502 Bird, G. 883, 890, 892 Bishop, E. R. 572 Bitbol, M. 254, 255 Bjorkqvist, K. 621n Blackburn, S. 275, 977 Blaison, D. 1116 Blake, A. 994 Blakemore, S. J. 587, 1112, 1113 Blanca, C. 626 Blarney, P. H. 804 Blanche, O. 847 Blankenburg, W. auditory verbal hallucinations bodily psychopathology 514, 516 and Boss 122, 123 clinical phenomenology 216, 217, common sense 105, 160, 385, delusion and mood disorders 106, 112, 114, 115, 118, 122, 515 112–14, 116, 192, 515 749 799–800 218n, 219, 219n, 220–2, 223 469, 816 755, 757, 758, 760 dialectical model of suffering emotion 312–13 Tendon 143 and Heidegger 122, 158, 162 and Husserl 16 hysteria 652, 656, 657, 661 ipseity-disturbance model and Kimura 148, 152 natural evidence, loss of 17 normality 292 overview 157–64 personhood 340 phenomenological psychopathology psychoanalysis 1046 psychosis 847 schizophrenia 635, 736 schizophrenic autism 814, Blase, S. 849 Bleuler, E. autism 109, 696, 697, 1080 and Binswanger and Boss 118 catatonia 519 clinicians 1007 formal thought disorder 453 language disorders 453 and Minkowski 104, 105 auditory verbal hallucinations psychosis 839 schizophrenia 728, 731, 737, schizophrenic autism 385, “vivid thoughts” 591 Bleuler, M. 611 Blinder, A. 988n Bliss, E. L. 569 Bloch, M. H. 637 Bloch, S. 973 Bloomer, D. 524n Blumstein, S. E. 453 Bocchi, G. 769 Bockting, W. O. 556 Baedeker, E. C. 344n Boelen, B. 120 Boétie, E. 661 Bogousslavsky, J. 649 Böhme, G. 873, 874, 875, Holland, B. 1034 Bollnow, O. F. 308 792 738, 872, 945 812–14, 816–20, 821, 823–4 Bolton, D. 859, 932, 958, 965, 1009 Bombard, A. R. 476 Bonnier, P. 512, 720 Bonoldi, I. 491, 493, 570 Boors, C. 356 Bork-Jacobson, M. 307 Borda, J.-P. 597n, 601, 608, 609, 610, Borgia, E. 686 Borgwardt, S. 842 Beria, S. 706 Boring, E. G. 252, 1017n Bormuth, M. 100n, 101n, 102n Bortolan, A. 1058, 1059n Bortolotti, L. 265, 587 Boss, M. 26, 30–2, 115, 118–25, 159, Cost, J. 52 Bostroem, A. 519 Botvinick, M. 1110, 1111 Bouchard, T. J. 803 Bouchereau, M. 1112 Bouras, N. 1093 Bourdieu, P. 434, 556 Covet, P. 106, 109, 468, 738, 739, 814, Borden, H. 1018n, 1053, 1056 Bower, M. 328 Bowie, C. R. 447 Bowman, G. 1053n Boyle, M. 813 Bracken, L. A. W. 968 Bradley, E. A. 1083 Bradley, R. 827 Bradley, S. J. 559 Brain, W. R. 513 Brampton, S. 1053n Brand, B. L. 566 Brandizzi, M. 570 Bauer, R. 845 Bran, C. M. J. 452 Brazil, I. A. 890 Green, N. 587 Brenner, S. 1034 Brencio, F. 350n, 351n Brenoff, A. 994 Brent, B. K. 610, 847, 848 Brentano, F. 12, 15, 21, 118, 206, 226, Brewer, J. 111, 475, 567, 1042 Bruin, C. R. 580 Beyer, T. 288 798n, 845, 846, 847, 848, 849, 947 216, 218, 219, 222, 222n, 223, 402 816, 817, 820, 822, 945, 1017n, 1018 248, 250, 253, 325, 326, 327, 376, 443 Brian, M. de 73 Bridgman, P. W. 1017n Friend, F. 292 Brismar, T. 1117 Broadbent, D. E. 425 Brock, P. 456 Brogan, W. W. 347n Bromberg, P. M. 835 Brook, M. 890 Brooke, M. R. atmospheres 876 auditory verbal hallucinations 794n, 797n autobiography 1055 borderline personality disorder 829 clinicians 1004, 1012 cognitive sciences 265 and Conrad 744n hysteria 567 law 860 and Minkowski 104 neuroscience 909 phenomenological psychopathology 942n phenomenology 377n psychiatric classification 1018n, 1021, 1022 psychiatry psychopathy 883, 888n psychosis 840, 844, 846 thought insertion 493n, 587, 588, 589, 592 Brøcited SøJensen, J. 1061n Brothers, L. 699 Brown, I. 1097 Brown, P. 859 Brown, R. 1097 Brute, H. 510, 711, 1053n Brudzińska, J. 318 Rugger, P. 1111 Bruininks, R. 1096 Brine, M. 889 Pruner, J. 1055, 1056 Brunschvig, L. Bschor, T. 437, 627n Buber, M. 112, 114, 115, 182, 683 Bucciantini, M. 165 Buccione, I. 571 Buchan, L. 1091 Bucholtz, M. 555 Büher, K. 253 Bulhan, H. A. 173 Brian, M. de 73 Bridgman, P. W. 1017n Friend, F. 292 Brismar, T. 1117 Broadbent, D. E. 425 Brock, P. 456 Brogan, W. W. 347n Bromberg, P. M. 835 Brook, M. 890 Brooke, M. R. atmospheres 876 auditory verbal hallucinations 794n, 797n autobiography 1055 borderline personality disorder 829 clinicians 1004, 1012 cognitive sciences 265 and Conrad 744n hysteria 567 law 860 and Minkowski 104 neuroscience 909 phenomenological psychopathology 942n phenomenology 377n psychiatric classification 1018n, 1021, 1022 psychiatry psychopathy 883, 888n psychosis 840, 844, 846 thought insertion 493n, 587, 588, 589, 592 Brøcited SøJensen, J. 1061n Brothers, L. 699 Brown, I. 1097 Brown, P. 859 Brown, R. 1097 Brute, H. 510, 711, 1053n Brudzińska, J. 318 Rugger, P. 1111 Bruininks, R. 1096 Brine, M. 889 Pruner, J. 1055, 1056 Brunschvig, L. Bschor, T. 437, 627n Buber, M. 112, 114, 115, 182, 683 Bucciantini, M. 165 Buccione, I. 571 Buchan, L. 1091 Bucholtz, M. 555 Büher, K. 253 Bulhan, H. A. 173 Bultmann, R. 187 Burke, O. 134, 839 Buranen, C. 572 Burch, M. I. 25n Burgess, D. 1094 Bürgy, M. 637, 638, 639, Burns, A. 510 Bush, G. 523 Bossing, A. 1088 Butler, A. 988 Butler, J. 211 Buzsaki, G. 1111 Byrd, W. C. 989n Byron, G. 599, 609, 822, Caff, E. 1111 Cardin, R. 1097 Ballard, F. 1033 Callieri, B. 687, 688, 773, Caltagirone, C. 571, 1116 Clvi, L. 17 Camac, C. N. B. 1013 Cameron, J. 814 Cameron, N. 452 Campbell, J. 264, 269, 411–12 Campbell, S. M. 620 Camus, A. 184 Canetti, E. 779 Canguilhem, G. 229, 293 Cannon, B. 35 Cantor, G. 12 Napa, R. L. 1116 Capgras, K. 774, 776, 778 Caplan, D. 453 Caramazza, A. 453 Cardeña, E. 568 Cardozo, B. 859n Camel, H. H. 32, 1054, 1055 Cargnello, D. 688, 770, 771, Earhart-Harris, R. L. 915 Carlesimo, G. A. 571 Barman, T. 329 Carmenates, S. 569, 606 Caroff, S. N. 519, 521 Carr, D. 291 Carr, R. B. 897 Carr, fifth. 841 Carroll, H. 356 Parse, J. P. 542 640, 728 845 775, 776–7, 587 776, 779, 780, 781, 782–3 Carver, C. S. 717 Casey, E. 433 Casey, H. 890 Cash, T. F. 535 Caspar, F. 1031 Cassirer, E. 43–4, 174, 454 Castellini, G. 361, 530, 531, 532, Cather, C. 579 Bella, M. 829 Center, J. 1083 Cermolacce, M. 470, 591, 794, Cesar, D. D. 30n, 64 Cezanne, P. 44–5, 49–50 Chadwick, P. 500, 502 Chafes, R. 878 Chaika, E. 453 Chalasani, P. 524n Chalmers, D. J. 15 Chambon, fifth. 1112 Chammond, J. 658 Chandrasena, R. 524n Chanel, A. M. 849 Chang, H. 1017n Chapman, J. 331, 425 Chapman, R. S. 1095 Chappell, A. L. 1092 Charbonneau, G. 651, 652, 653, Chariot, J.-M. 567, 653 Harlot, L. 1093 Carney, D. S. 756–7, 758 Charon, R. 1059 Chefurka, C. M. 253, 606, 612 Chemero, A. 1069 Chen, C.-H. 1092 Cheri, A. 173 Chiarelli, A. M. 1112 Chiarugi, fifth. 335 Childless, J. F. 973 Chomsky, N. 279, 456 Christmas, J. 375n Churchland, P. S. 121 Cicchetti, D. fifth. 567 Ciccone, A. 1085 Ciompi, L. 814 Ciullo, fifth. 1116 Clark, D. A. 581 Clark, D. M. 578 Clark, M. J. 608 533, 534, 556, 710, 714, 715, 716 1109 658, 659 Clark, S. 1112 Clark, S. C. 864 Clarkin, J. F. 832 Classed, C. C. 566 Claude, H. 772 Cleckley, H. 882, 884, 885, 886, 887, 890 Clement, B. A. 916 Clérambault, G. De 772 Cleveland, S. E. 720 Cloninger, C. R. 573 Cocks, G. 134 Cohen Kadosh, R. 1117 Cohen, F. 1114 Cohen, J. 250, 251, 1110, 1111 Cohen, J. D. 716 Cohen, M. E. 572 Cohen, R. A. 84n, 85n Cohen, R. P. 675 Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. 555, 559 John, R. 567 Cole, P. M. 828 Oles, M. E. 438 Colombetti, G. 327, 330, 1060, 1069 Coltheart, M. 587 Colucci, M. 165n, 167 Zomba, L. 166n Comparelli, A. 843 Condrau, G. 115 Condor, C. 500 Conrad, K. 107, 492, 495, 502, 570, 730, Conrad-Marius, H. 20 Conway, L. 562 Cooke, D. J. 882, 885, 886, 887, 889 Mooney, G. 1092 Cooper, J. E. 354 Cooper, P. J. 531 Cooper, R. 991n, 992, 1054 Cooper, S. A. 1081, 1083, 1093 Corner, G. 998 Coriando, P. L. 347n, 349n Corlett, P. R. 591 Cornell, D. 174 Correale, A. 676 Cornell, C. U. 841 Coseru, C. 325 Cost, C. 569, 606, 874, 875, 876, 1013 Costantini, M. 1111, 1112, 1114, 1115, Costello, H. 1093 Clark, S. 1112 Clark, S. C. 864 Clarkin, J. F. 832 Classed, C. C. 566 Claude, H. 772 Cleckley, H. 882, 884, 885, 886, 887, 890 Clement, B. A. 916 Clérambault, G. De 772 Cleveland, S. E. 720 Cloninger, C. R. 573 Cocks, G. 134 Cohen Kadosh, R. 1117 Cohen, F. 1114 Cohen, J. 250, 251, 1110, 1111 Cohen, J. D. 716 Cohen, M. E. 572 Cohen, R. A. 84n, 85n Cohen, R. P. 675 Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. 555, 559 John, R. 567 Cole, P. M. 828 Oles, M. E. 438 Colombetti, G. 327, 330, 1060, 1069 Coltheart, M. 587 Colucci, M. 165n, 167 Zomba, L. 166n Comparelli, A. 843 Condrau, G. 115 Condor, C. 500 Conrad, K. 107, 492, 495, 502, 570, 730, Conrad-Marius, H. 20 Conway, L. 562 Cooke, D. J. 882, 885, 886, 887, 889 Mooney, G. 1092 Cooper, J. E. 354 Cooper, P. J. 531 Cooper, R. 991n, 992, 1054 Cooper, S. A. 1081, 1083, 1093 Corner, G. 998 Coriando, P. L. 347n, 349n Corlett, P. R. 591 Cornell, D. 174 Correale, A. 676 Cornell, C. U. 841 Coseru, C. 325 Cost, C. 569, 606, 874, 875, 876, 1013 Costantini, M. 1111, 1112, 1114, 1115, Costello, H. 1093 744, 745, 746, 746n, 747–50, 840, 844, 877 1116 Coulter, D. L. 1088 Bowen, P. 585 Crammer, J. L. 422–3 Crane, T. 15 Crawford, J. R. 863 Creedon, T. B. 991 Critchley, M. 427, 523 Critchley, S. 384n Compton, M. 1087 Cowell, S. G. 344n Cress, D. G. 539 Crumlish, N. 1031 Chef, H. 640 Cuesta, M. J. 523, 524, 603 Cumming, R. A. 1097 Cuthbert, B. N. 1, 909, 973, 1016 Cutting, J. 58, 104, 386, 425–6, 501, 509, Butts, S. 1092 Cvetkovich, A. 996 Dabholkar, P. O. 522n Dagnan, D. 1092 D’Agostino, A. 671, 672, 675, 828, 829, 831, Dolby, J. T. 476, 477 Dale Luke, R. 581 Damasio, A. R. 306, 699, 930, 1070 Banner, D. 998 Danziger, K. 253 Daprati, E. 266, 1112 Das, J. P. 1094 Daskalakis, Z. J. 1118 Dauenhauer, B. 72n David, A. S. 601, 791, 795, 848, 859, 864, Davidson, D. 867 Davies, M. 587, 591 Davis, A. Y. 997 Davis, M. H. 829 Davis fourth, H. H. 912 Deary, I. J. 1095 Beaver, C. M. 533 Deb, S. 1093 De Block, A. 889 Decety, J. 891 De Marine, I. 718 Deglin, fifth. L. 454 De Grief, J. 1084, 1096, 1098 Dan, E. 814 De Jaegher, H. 1069 De Leeds-Smith, S. 790 510, 511, 512, 669, 860, 875, 883, 889, 936 832–3 866, 909 Delespaul, P. 489, 490n Deleuze, G. 88, 91–3, 145, 146 Deligiorgi, K. 375n Dell, P. F. 569, 571 Belle Luke, C. 777 Dell’Oslo, L. 1081 Deltas, F. A. 772 Del Pistoia, L. 771n, 776 Demaret, A. 889, 890 Dining, T. R. 485, 487 Bennett, D. C. 262, 263, 268n Dens, D. 581 Dentin, N. K. 925, 926 Depraz, N. 318, 618, 660 De Preester, H. 279n, 280 Derrida, J. 64, 88–90, 93, 213, 902 Desai, M. 173 Descartes, R. 44, 73, 92, 120, 248, de Sousa, R. 306 Deste, G. 841 Devivo, M. J. 863 De Baal, F. B. 891 de Waelhens, A. 218 Dewhurst, K. 486n Dharmaīrti 325 Dickerson, before Christ 567 Dijon, J. 542 Diebold, C. 571 Signāga 325 Dijkerman, H. C. 1109 Billing, H. 636 Dillon, M. C. Dilthey, W. 96, 100, 101, 122, 211, 226, Di Lula, M. 1111 Dingemans, A. E. 533 Di Pitta, G. 692 Di Vittorio, P. 165n, 167 Dixon, T. 309 Dixon-Ibarra, A. 1083 Dodder, R. A. 1087 Dodgson, G. 797 Doge, K. 912, 916 Dörr-Álamos, A. 757 Dörr-Zegers, O. 661, 753, 754, 755, Donahue, J. 226 Boron, G. 580 Doyen, A. 1096 Doze, F. 72n Delespaul, P. 489, 490n Deleuze, G. 88, 91–3, 145, 146 Deligiorgi, K. 375n Dell, P. F. 569, 571 Belle Luke, C. 777 Dell’Oslo, L. 1081 Deltas, F. A. 772 Del Pistoia, L. 771n, 776 Demaret, A. 889, 890 Dining, T. R. 485, 487 Bennett, D. C. 262, 263, 268n Dens, D. 581 Dentin, N. K. 925, 926 Depraz, N. 318, 618, 660 De Preester, H. 279n, 280 Derrida, J. 64, 88–90, 93, 213, 902 Desai, M. 173 Descartes, R. 44, 73, 92, 120, 248, de Sousa, R. 306 Deste, G. 841 Devivo, M. J. 863 De Baal, F. B. 891 de Waelhens, A. 218 Dewhurst, K. 486n Dharmaīrti 325 Dickerson, before Christ 567 Dijon, J. 542 Diebold, C. 571 Signāga 325 Dijkerman, H. C. 1109 Billing, H. 636 Dillon, M. C. Dilthey, W. 96, 100, 101, 122, 211, 226, Di Lula, M. 1111 Dingemans, A. E. 533 Di Pitta, G. 692 Di Vittorio, P. 165n, 167 Dixon, T. 309 Dixon-Ibarra, A. 1083 Dodder, R. A. 1087 Dodgson, G. 797 Doge, K. 912, 916 Dörr-Álamos, A. 757 Dörr-Zegers, O. 661, 753, 754, 755, Donahue, J. 226 Boron, G. 580 Doyen, A. 1096 Doze, F. 72n 301, 367–8, 369, 371, 389–90, 398, 477 1045 760, 764, 876, 878 Dostoevsky, F. 184, 683, Doyen, M. 288 Freer, L. E. 863 Dreyfus, H. L. 184, 208, D’Sousa, R. 1088 Du Lois, W. E. B. 175 Duchamp, M. 875, 876 Dufrenne, M. 73, 878 Degas, L. 570 Duncan, N. W. 912 Dunlap, F. 59 Duns Scouts, J. 20, 325 Dupeé, E. P. 772, 849 Duran, G. 777–8 Dual, C. Z. 1116 Dworetzky, B. A. 567 Dworkin, G. 374–5 Dykes, E. M. 1096 Earnshaw, S. 184 Easter, M. M. 983 Eastgate, G. 1091 Ebisch, S. J. 1113, 1114 Ocker, W. 637 Edwin, J. O. 1094 Ellen, P. 173 Ehrenberg, A. 146, 620 Ehrenwald, H. 513 Egret, A. M. 636 Ehrsson, H. H. 847 Milan, N. 410n, 1109 Eisner, R. 477 Ekman, P. 306 Eliot, T. S. 820 Ellenberger, H. F. 148, Elliott, M. A. 1116 Ellis, H. 818 Ellis, R. D. 1070 Elpidorou, A. 346n, 460n, Emerson, E. 1082, 1083, Emmelkamp, P. 581 Empedocles 325 Englebert, J. 883, 884, Enoch, M. D. 625 Erickson, P. E. 997, 998, Erickson, S. K. 997, 998, Ernst, M. O. 1111 Escher, S. 796, 797, 798 Spinet, D. 337 782 329, 460n, 1070, 1074 667 1093 889, 890, 891, 892, 1058 998n 998n Esquirol, E. 636 Ettinger, U. 1114 Evans, G. 1071 Evnine, S. J. 407n Ey, H. 161, 386n, 746, 772, 849 Faddy, L. 571 Fairburn, C. G. 530, 531, 711, 712, 715 Falkai, P. 2 Anon, F. 170, 173–81 Farina, G. 273 Fairer, C. 266, 267, 1112 Java, G. 840 Favazza, A. 834 Fédida, P. 1050, 1098 Fence, D. 1093 Jenner, D. 876 Ferenczi, S. 897 Ferguson, P. M. 995 Fernandez, A. fifth. 1, 4, 31n, 32, 192n, 197n, Ferrari, F. 559 Ferrari, M. 235 Ferrets, G. 338 Jerri, F. 849, 1112, 1113, 1114, 1116, 1117 Merrier, S. 580 Ferric, C. 772 Ferry, A. 1050 Feuerbach, L. 185 Feutrill, J. 521 Fichtner, G. 112 Fugal, G. 120, 240, 337 Figueira, M. L. 569, 627, 879 Fink, E. 250n, 253, 256n, 599, 599n Fink, M. 423, 519, 521 Fiorillo, A. 3, 1005, 1008 Firming, A. 175 First, M. B. 3, 538, 872 Fish, F. 511 Fished, A. K. 579 Fisher, L. 292 Fisher, S. 720 Fitzgerald, P. B. 1118 Flaubert, G. 35 Flaum, M. 864 Fleming, G. W. T. H. 569 Fleminger, S. 423 Fletcher, P. C. 590–1, 845 Flowers, P. 214 Fonagy, P. 831 Esquirol, E. 636 Ettinger, U. 1114 Evans, G. 1071 Evnine, S. J. 407n Ey, H. 161, 386n, 746, 772, 849 Faddy, L. 571 Fairburn, C. G. 530, 531, 711, 712, 715 Falkai, P. 2 Anon, F. 170, 173–81 Farina, G. 273 Fairer, C. 266, 267, 1112 Java, G. 840 Favazza, A. 834 Fédida, P. 1050, 1098 Fence, D. 1093 Jenner, D. 876 Ferenczi, S. 897 Ferguson, P. M. 995 Fernandez, A. fifth. 1, 4, 31n, 32, 192n, 197n, Ferrari, F. 559 Ferrari, M. 235 Ferrets, G. 338 Jerri, F. 849, 1112, 1113, 1114, 1116, 1117 Merrier, S. 580 Ferric, C. 772 Ferry, A. 1050 Feuerbach, L. 185 Feutrill, J. 521 Fichtner, G. 112 Fugal, G. 120, 240, 337 Figueira, M. L. 569, 627, 879 Fink, E. 250n, 253, 256n, 599, 599n Fink, M. 423, 519, 521 Fiorillo, A. 3, 1005, 1008 Firming, A. 175 First, M. B. 3, 538, 872 Fish, F. 511 Fished, A. K. 579 Fisher, L. 292 Fisher, S. 720 Fitzgerald, P. B. 1118 Flaubert, G. 35 Flaum, M. 864 Fleming, G. W. T. H. 569 Fleminger, S. 423 Fletcher, P. C. 590–1, 845 Flowers, P. 214 Fonagy, P. 831 288, 627, 651n, 1020, 1024, 1025n, 1027 Foot, J. 165n, 166, 167, 168, 168n, 169, Ford, M. 997 Fossa, E. 925 Foster, J. D. 620 Fotopoulou, A. 513 Foucault, M. 88, 90–1, 93, 145, 165, 168, Voucher, J. R. 1116 Fawkes, J. 1091, 1092 Frances, A. J. 994–5 Franck, N. 1112, 1113 Frank, A. W. 1056n Frank, L. E. 983 Frank, R. G. 989n Frankfurt, H. 269 Frank, fifth. E. 148, 184, 397, 399, 683 Franklin, S. 417 Franz, E. 1070 Freeman, L. 346n, 460n, 667 Freeman, T. 814 Free, G. 249, 1068, 1071, 1072 Fri, L. 1031 Freida, M. 566 French, P. 1092, 1093 Freud, Sigmund anxiety 475, 476, 479 autism 697 autoerotism 813 and Beauvoir Bellevue Sanatorium 111, 112 and Binswanger 29, 111, 112, 119 and Boss 118, 119, 121, 122 and Brentano 119 clinicians 1007 depression 538n emotions 1069 feelings 477 gender identity 555 grief 538n, 539n hysteria 567, 650 and Jasper 96, 98–9, 100, 102, 113 mental disorder 1071 and Merleau-Monty 43, 44, 46, 47–8 obsessive-compulsive conditions 640, phenomenology 93 psychoanalysis 1042, 1043, 1045–6, 1047, and Ricoeur and Sartre 35 schizophrenia 607 169n 169, 169n, 171, 466, 995n, 1049, 1069 643 1048, 1049, 1050, 1051 schizophrenic autism 818, 819, and Straps 127 trauma 897, 901, 903 unconscious 318, 320–1, 322, Freyenhagen, F. 859, 860, 863, Rick, P. J. 883, 892 Pricker, M. 989 Brie, R. Friedman, M. 573 Rings, M. S. 59 Frisson, K. 268 Firth, C. D. 17, 267, 268–9, 587, Firth, U. 699, 706 Froese, T. 434 Fryer, D. R. 84n Fuchs, C. 1087 Fuchs, T. auditory verbal hallucinations autobiography 1053, 1059n autonomy 378 bodily psychopathology 514–15 borderline personality disorder delusional mood 745 depression 132, 200n, 543n, 619, dissociation 569, 570 eating disorders 534, 715, 716 EAWE 612 embodiment 369, 370, 371, 461, emotions 311, 618, 1069 and Husserl 17, 318 hysteria 659 intentionality 331 and Jasper 96n limit situations 676 mania 627 melancholia 470, 569 moods 460 neuroscience 909 normality 286–7, 292 obsessive-compulsive disorder phenomenological psychopathology phenomenology 308, 930, 931 psychiatric classification 1024n psychopathology 5, 269 psychopathy 890 psychosis 131 psychotherapy 967 schizophrenia 372, 628n, 653, 821n 323 864, 865, 866, 868 590–1, 609, 845, 1112 793, 793n, 800n, 516 670, 675 620, 621, 622, 623, 625, 628n 656, 1109 schizophrenic autism 816 shame 669 thought insertion 590 time 132, 200n, 258, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 621, 622, 623, 625, 627, 628n, 629 Fukuda, K. 1111 Fulford, D. 843 Fulford, K. W. M. 1, 355, 356, 357, 363, 397, 958, Fuller, D. A. 989n, 998 Furman, M. 167 FurtwäOgler, W. 112 Fusar-Poi, P. 2, 484, 492, 493, 502, 503, 570, 841, Buster, J. M. 931 Gabriel, E. 829 Gadamer, H.-G. 25, 63–71, 212, 240–1, 242, 279, Gaebel, W. 729 Gage, P. 863 Galderisi, S. 2 Gallagher, I. I. 1109, 1112 Gallagher, S. autism 699, 700 autobiography 1057, 1057n, 1061n cognitive sciences 262, 263, 264, 265n, 266, 267, depression 619 eating disorders 714 hermeneutics 236, 237 and Husserl 17 intentionality 327, 328, 328n, 329, 331 introspection 254 ipseity-disturbance model 598 obsessive-compulsive disorder 1073 personhood 336, 337, 338 phenomenology 927, 928, 929, 930, 931, 934 psychiatric classification 1023–4 schizophrenia 435 selfhood 465 thought ownership 586 Gallese, fifth. 17, 704, 705, 849, 930, 1109, 1112, Gall, P. F. 166 Gallinat, J. 914 Gamma, F. 610, 846 Gangemi, A. 580 Gantt, E. E. 84n Garcia, A. 982 Garcia-Balls, P. R. 398 Garner, D. M. 718 Hatfield, P. D. 572 Gaupp, R. 134, 135, 136, 772, 779, 780 437, 438, 462, 463, 468, 543n, 617, 618, 619, 620, 965, 966, 973, 1009, 1012, 1033 842, 843, 844, 848, 849 461, 461n, 764, 1012, 1020, 1083 268, 269, 269n Gazzaniga, M. S. 418 Gebsattel, fifth. E. von anxiety 478 atmospheres 878 conscience 399, 400, 401, 403 depression 132, 618, 624 drug addiction 689 and Heidegger 30 and Husserl 16 and Jasper 102 melancholia 143 obsessive-compulsive conditions phenomenological psychopathology’s origins and Straps 126 time 132, 431, 438, 617, 618 Ge Hong 173 Gel, A. 43, 44, 454 Elder, M. 585 Gendlin, E. 214 Genie-Perrin, G. 772 gramsénnart, M. 730, 745 Gerhardt, fifth. 974 Ermine, L. 1114 Germans, P. 587 Neva, A. B. 1111 Ghaemi, S. N. 859, 860 Giacometti, A. 878 Gibson, J. J. 328, 600, 845 Gibson, N. C. 173 Middens, A. 555–6 Giersch, A. 489, 492, 1116 Gilbert, P. 621n Gillberg, C. 699 Gillespie, R. D. 424 Billet, G. 372, 1070, 1073, 1075 Gilman, S. L. 989n, 993n Gilmore, C. S. 916 Gilmore, R. L. 510 Giordano, J. 1 Giordano, S. 555 Giorgi, A. 214, 377, 378, 660 Gerard, R. 782 Giuliani, A. 841 Gjesdal, K. 235 Alas, G. 372 Glaser, B. G. 926 Glatzel, J. 756 Glenn, C. R. 828 Gazzaniga, M. S. 418 Gebsattel, fifth. E. von anxiety 478 atmospheres 878 conscience 399, 400, 401, 403 depression 132, 618, 624 drug addiction 689 and Heidegger 30 and Husserl 16 and Jasper 102 melancholia 143 obsessive-compulsive conditions phenomenological psychopathology’s origins and Straps 126 time 132, 431, 438, 617, 618 Ge Hong 173 Gel, A. 43, 44, 454 Elder, M. 585 Gendlin, E. 214 Genie-Perrin, G. 772 gramsénnart, M. 730, 745 Gerhardt, fifth. 974 Ermine, L. 1114 Germans, P. 587 Neva, A. B. 1111 Ghaemi, S. N. 859, 860 Giacometti, A. 878 Gibson, J. J. 328, 600, 845 Gibson, N. C. 173 Middens, A. 555–6 Giersch, A. 489, 492, 1116 Gilbert, P. 621n Gillberg, C. 699 Gillespie, R. D. 424 Billet, G. 372, 1070, 1073, 1075 Gilman, S. L. 989n, 993n Gilmore, C. S. 916 Gilmore, R. L. 510 Giordano, J. 1 Giordano, S. 555 Giorgi, A. 214, 377, 378, 660 Gerard, R. 782 Giuliani, A. 841 Gjesdal, K. 235 Alas, G. 372 Glaser, B. G. 926 Glatzel, J. 756 Glenn, C. R. 828 510, 579, 580, 581, 637, 640, 642 515 Glesne, C. 926 Glezerman, T. B. 453, 805 Glicksman, S. 1088 Lied, S. 989n Glover, J. 883 Hoffman, E. 165, 166n, 168–9, 462 Goldberg, T. E. 608 Goldie, P. 545, 1053n, 1057n Goldman, A. 375n Goldstein, K. 43, 44, 112, 118, 143, Goldwater, B. 994 gramsöInner, S. 637 Gonzalez, R. A. 883 Good, B. 546 Goodbody, S. J. 1112 Goodly, D. 1092 Goodman, M. 829 Goodsitt, A. 712 Goodwin, F. K. 621 Goren, L. 553 Gopnik, A. 699 Gordon, J. A. 174, 178 Gordon, L. R. 173, 174, 177 Gordon, R. M. 306 Gordon, S. 797 Gore A. 146 Gottdiener, W. H. 982 Gotthelf, J. 223n Gozé, T. 1020 Graham, G. 264, 265, 398 Graham, K. T. 1115 Graham-Schmidt, K. T. 1113 Grandin, T. 700, 703 Ranger, B. 104, 106 Grant, P. 1114 Grant, S. 874 Green, A. 1050 Green, B. 1033 Green, R. 559 Green, S. A. 973 Greenberg, L. S. 1060 Greisch, J. 72n, 236 Irene, M. 49 Griesinger, W. 111, 113, 636, 839 Griffero, T. 750, 874, 875, 876, 877, Griffith, E. 1033 Grill, C. M. 533 Grisso, T. 861, 862 Glesne, C. 926 Glezerman, T. B. 453, 805 Glicksman, S. 1088 Lied, S. 989n Glover, J. 883 Hoffman, E. 165, 166n, 168–9, 462 Goldberg, T. E. 608 Goldie, P. 545, 1053n, 1057n Goldman, A. 375n Goldstein, K. 43, 44, 112, 118, 143, Goldwater, B. 994 gramsöInner, S. 637 Gonzalez, R. A. 883 Good, B. 546 Goodbody, S. J. 1112 Goodly, D. 1092 Goodman, M. 829 Goodsitt, A. 712 Goodwin, F. K. 621 Goren, L. 553 Gopnik, A. 699 Gordon, J. A. 174, 178 Gordon, L. R. 173, 174, 177 Gordon, R. M. 306 Gordon, S. 797 Gore A. 146 Gottdiener, W. H. 982 Gotthelf, J. 223n Gozé, T. 1020 Graham, G. 264, 265, 398 Graham, K. T. 1115 Graham-Schmidt, K. T. 1113 Grandin, T. 700, 703 Ranger, B. 104, 106 Grant, P. 1114 Grant, S. 874 Green, A. 1050 Green, B. 1033 Green, R. 559 Green, S. A. 973 Greenberg, L. S. 1060 Greisch, J. 72n, 236 Irene, M. 49 Griesinger, W. 111, 113, 636, 839 Griffero, T. 750, 874, 875, 876, 877, Griffith, E. 1033 Grill, C. M. 533 Grisso, T. 861, 862 452, 454, 514, 515, 516, 607, 608 878 Grøn, A. 337, 339 Grondin, J. 64, 235 Groopman, J. 1031 Gross, G. 688, 730, 745n, 840, Gross, G. D. 991 Gross, G. M. 1114 Rube, M. 813, 876 Gruhle, H. W. 97, 98, 361, 484, Grünbaum, A. A. 487–9, 496, Grünbaum, T. 268 Gründgrens, G. 112 Guattari, F. Gunther, L. 997 Guidano, fifth. 579 Guignon, C. 460n Gunderson, J. G. 829, 832 Gurwitsch, A. 214, 249, 250, Guy, W. 754 Gaze, S. B. 572, 573 Naan, S. de 332, 581, 793, 816 Habermas, J. 64 Hacking, I. 471 Hadjioannou, C. 347n Häfer, H. 840, 842 Haven, F. W. 485 Haggard, P. 266, 267, 1111, Hall, J. R. 890 Hall, K. 555 Halligan, P. W. 909 Hamilton, D. 1083 Hamilton, M. 521n Hmm, J. P. 916 Hammond, M. 418–19 Hand, S. 379n Panda, I. A. 357 Hardest, P. 287, 469n, 568, Appè, F. 699 Harcourt, E. 400 Hardcastle, fifth. G. 1058 Hardy, G. 1091 Hare, R. D. 398, 882, 883, Hare, R. M. 356 Garland, R. 377n, 860 Harlow, J. M. 863 Harnic, D. 805 Harré, R. 1070 Harris, P. L. 818 Harrison, J. 554 Grøn, A. 337, 339 Grondin, J. 64, 235 Groopman, J. 1031 Gross, G. 688, 730, 745n, 840, Gross, G. D. 991 Gross, G. M. 1114 Rube, M. 813, 876 Gruhle, H. W. 97, 98, 361, 484, Grünbaum, A. A. 487–9, 496, Grünbaum, T. 268 Gründgrens, G. 112 Guattari, F. Gunther, L. 997 Guidano, fifth. 579 Guignon, C. 460n Gunderson, J. G. 829, 832 Gurwitsch, A. 214, 249, 250, Guy, W. 754 Gaze, S. B. 572, 573 Naan, S. de 332, 581, 793, 816 Habermas, J. 64 Hacking, I. 471 Hadjioannou, C. 347n Häfer, H. 840, 842 Haven, F. W. 485 Haggard, P. 266, 267, 1111, Hall, J. R. 890 Hall, K. 555 Halligan, P. W. 909 Hamilton, D. 1083 Hamilton, M. 521n Hmm, J. P. 916 Hammond, M. 418–19 Hand, S. 379n Panda, I. A. 357 Hardest, P. 287, 469n, 568, Appè, F. 699 Harcourt, E. 400 Hardcastle, fifth. G. 1058 Hardy, G. 1091 Hare, R. D. 398, 882, 883, Hare, R. M. 356 Garland, R. 377n, 860 Harlow, J. M. 863 Harnic, D. 805 Harré, R. 1070 Harris, P. L. 818 Harrison, J. 554 841, 842, 946 491, 492, 730 498 252, 263, 299, 301, 419, 598n 1112, 1113, 1116 569, 570, 603, 1110 884n, 885, 890, 891, 892 Harrison, P. 1034, 1096 Harrison, P. J. 530, 585, 711 Hart, J. G. 467 Harvey, P. D. 447 Haslam, N. 982, 1033 Haler, G. 915 Hassiotis, A. 1082, 1086 Hanson, U. 1117 Hastings, R. P. 1083 Patton, C. 1083 Hatzimoysis, A. Haul, R. 146 Hug, E. 468, 733, 946, 947 Haugeland, J. 460n Havercamp, S. M. 1083 Hawkins, A. H. 1055 Hayes, D. J. 914 Hayward, M. 789 Hayward, P. 864 Kazan, C. 549n He, B. J. 1117 Head, H. 47, 512, 513, 714 Heal, J. 410n Keaton, J. 188 Hecaen, H. 513, 516 Hegel, G. W. F. 51, 54, 235, 274 Heidbreder, E. 252 Heidegger, M. abnormality 43 Effective intentionality 330 alterity 383 anxiety 476, 479 and Beauvoir Befindlichkeit 194–5, 198, 199, 201, 202, 239, being-with-others 462 Bellevue Sanatorium 112 and Binswanger 25, 29–30, 31, 106, 112, 114, biological grounding of phenomenology, dismissal of and Blankenburg 122, 158, 162 boredom 667–8 and Boss 118–19, 121, 122–3 and Brentano 118 care 683–4 clinical phenomenology 218, 219, 220, 220n conscience 397, 399, 401–2, 403n Casein 25, 28, 30, 31, 82, 83, 106, 120, 157, 193, 344–51, 460n delusion and mood disorders 763 344–51, 459–60, 693 115, 118, 122, 515 211, 212, 216–17 n, 220n, 221n 274, 300, 316, embodiment 368, 369, 370 emotion 307–8 existentialism 185, 193, 193n, 960 and Gadamer hermeneutical phenomenology 238–41 and Husserl 26–7, 82, 119–20, 238–9 introspection 249, 250n, 252, 256, and Kimura 148, 153 and Ling 185 and Levinas and Merleau-Monty 25, 120 moods 311, 745 neurophenomenology 279 ontology 27, 29, 31, 82, 196, 197 overview 25–34 paranoia 781 phenomenology 197, 206–14, 274, and Plügge 122–3 psychiatric classification 1025 psychiatric ethics 977 psychoanalysis 1048–9, 1050 and Ricoeur 74 and Schemer 59 and Schorstein (Ling’s mentor) 182 self 299, 300, 337, 338 and Stein 20 and Tellenbach 141, 143 thought, speech, and language disorders thrownness ( Geworfenheit ) 143 time 83, 122, 162, 389, 391, 393–4, trauma 900–2, 903 Hanämaa, S. 285, 288, 291 Held, K. 348n Heller-Roazen, D. 318 Helm, A. B. 998 Helmholtz, H. von 495 Lemmings, C. P. 1093 Demon, A. 542 Hempen, C. G. 273, 1017n Hensley, D. R. 849 Henderson, D. K. 424 Henderson, K. 718 Hendricks, D. R. 1092 Henriksen, M. G. alterity 386 auditory verbal hallucinations 792, autobiography 1053, 337, 346 257 683, 815, 817, 927, 941, 941n, 942n 455–6 395, 431, 433, 463, 618 794, 794n, 796, 797 delusional mood 744n, 745 phenomenological psychopathology quantitative research 946n, 947 schizophrenia 244, 331, 385, 468, selfhood 466, 467, 468, 469, 469n, Henry, C. 627, 829 Henry, J. 883, 982 Henry, M. 93, 299, 302, 319, 928, Heywood, K. 926, 935 Herd, G. 560 Derek, G. M. 559 Herman, J. 900 Hernandez-Arieta, A. 1111 Herrera, G. 847 Herschmann, H. 452 Hesketh, L. J. 1095 Hicherson, R. 377, 378 Hill, C. E. 935 Hindmarch, T. 864 Hippocrates 123 Hiraki, K. 1111 Hirjak, D. 589 Hirschmann, S. 1111 Harsh, I. J. 1116 Robson, R. P. 699, 704 Hodapp, R. M. 1095 Hodges, J. R. 444, 445, 448 Hoffet, H. 753, 755 Hoffman, R. 487n, 500, 502 Hoffman, N. 637, 640, 642 Hofmann, B. 637, 640, 642 Hofmann, S. G. 578 Hofmannsthal, H. von 1013 Hölderlin, F. 753 Holdnack, J. A. 1095 Holenstein, E. 226 Collins, S. 1083 Holmes, G. 512, 513 Holmes, N. P. 1115 Homer 235, 874 Honer, W. G. 982 Honey, C. J. 1117 Hong, L. E. 1111 Hooker, C. I. 1114 Hope, T. 361, 860 Hopkins, B. 346n Corner-Johnson, W. 1083 Honey, K. 118 943, 944 469, 469n, 470, 598, 603, 731, 749 470, 598, 603 Hotopf, M. 859, 860, 864 Hogarth, J. 418 Owes, O. D. 570, 841, 844 Huang, Z. 912, 921 Huber, G. 512, 688, 840, 841 Hughes, I. A. 555 Hughes, J. C. 448, 449 Hughlings-Jackson, J. 486n, Hume, D. 252, 465, 465n Humphreys, H. 542 Humphreys, M. 872 Humpston, C. S. 493n, 587, Hunt, H. T. 253, 606, 612, 846 Hunter, E. 571 Hurlburt, R. T. 254 Hurley, A. 1093 Hurley, S. L. 328, 1067, 1070 Huron, C. 1116 Busby, R. 945 Husserl, E.

alterity 381, 382–3 appresentation 888 autobiography 1054, 1054n autonomy 376 “back to the things themselves” and Basaglia 165, 166, 167, and Beauvoir 51 Bellevue Sanatorium 112 and Binswanger 112, 115, biological grounding of phenomenology, dismissal of and Blankenburg 158, 160, and Boss 119–20, 121 and Brentano 118 clinical phenomenology 219, clinicians 1013 cognition 262–3, 1069 consciousness 398, 417, 418–19 crisis 987n and Deleuze 91–2 delusion and mood disorders and Derrida 88–9 drug addictions 693 eating disorders 715, 716, eidetic reduction 1023 embodiment 368, 370 emotion 307, 308 and Anon 175 genetic phenomenology 226–33 Page 25 of 61 607, 1065, 1066–71, 1073 589, 592, 794n, 797n 992n 168 515 338 162 220, 220n, 221, 420, 428 761, 762, 763 720 hallucinations 495, 498 and Heidegger 26–7, 82, 119–20, 238–9, 337, hermeneutical phenomenology 238–9, 241, 243 intentionality 325, 327–9, 327n, 331, 738 introspection 248, 249, 250, 251, 253, 254, 256, and Jasper and Kimura 150–1 and Levinas 80–1 life-world 987–8, 1000 and Merleau-Monty 42, 44, 47, 48, 120, 257, 259 motivation 601n neurophenomenology 278–9, 281 normality and abnormality 43, 284–5, 287–8, objectifying attitude 316 overview 11–19 personhood 336 phenomenological psychiatry 255n phenomenology 11, 119–20, 197, 205–13, 235, 930, 941, 941n, 942, 942n, 946, 953, 961, 1075 psychic causality 21 psychoanalysis 1042, 1043, 1044, 1047, 1048 and Ricoeur 73–4, 77 and Sartre 35 and Schemer schizophrenia 600, 738 self 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 337 sense 1071, 1072 static phenomenology 226–7, 228 static understanding 635 and Stein and Straps 127 thought, speech, and language disorders 455–6 time 83, 122, 389, 391–3, 394, 395, 431, 432, transcendental and empirical, distinction between unconscious 318, 319, 320, 322 understanding 956–7 values 362, 363 world-view 965 Husserl, H. 770 Hutton, D. D. 930 Hutton, P. 844 Hutzelmeyer-Nickels, A. 1083 Lyman, S. E. 612 Iazzetta, P. 581 Idles, J. 982 Illman, N. A. 280 Imam, S. S. 1088 Imhotep 173 346 257–9 289, 291, 293 273–4, 277, 317, 344n, 683, 815, 817, 927, 928, 617 196n Innocent, G. M. 472 Intel, T. R. 1, 2, 909, 973, 1016 Irwin, T. 400 Jablensky, A. 1004, 1018, 1115 Jackson, E. 859, 861 Jackson, H. F. 863 Jackson, H. J. 841 Jackson, R. 1087 Jacobi, C. 530 Jacobson, J. W. 1096 Jahoda, A. 1087, 1092 James, A. 560 James, W. 38, 100, 173, 248, 258, Jamison, K. R. 628 Janet, P. F. 106, 148, 572, 637, Janicki, M. P. 1083, 1096 Jansen, M. 916 Jansson, L. 568, 569, 570, 733, Jasper, K. atmospheres 877 attention and consciousness auditory verbal hallucinations autonomy 377 and Binswanger 112, 114 bodily psychopathology 511 and Boss 122, 123 catatonia 521–2, 525 clinical decision-making 1032 clinical phenomenology 217, clinicians 1005, 1007, 1008, cognitive science 263–4 consciousness 418, 419–20, 688 delusional mood 131, 743, 744–5 dialectical model of suffering explaining 407–8, 409 and Anon 175 fearlessness 478 and Freud 96, 98–9, 100, 102, and Gadamer and Gaupp 135 hallucinations 484, 485, 486, and Heidegger hermeneutics 245, 770 hysteria 651–2, 655 and Kretschmer 135, 136, 137–8 law 860, 861, 862, 866, 869 limit situations 619, 676 melancholia 603 303–4, 524, 919 813 745, 746, 942n, 943, 944, 944n 443, 446 791 218 1009–10, 1011, 746n, 747, 750 77 113 487–8, 491, 492, 503 mental health/illness 999–1000 mood 311 naturalistic and personalistic attitudes neurophenomenology 279–80 normality 292 obsessive-compulsive conditions overview 96–103 personality disorders 471 phenomenological psychopathology phenomenology 683, 931, 953, as physician and philosopher psychiatric classification 1021 psychiatric ethics 977, 982, 983 psychoanalysis 1042, 1045–7, psychopathology 1, 7, 191 psychopathy 887 psychosis 840, 844, 849 psychotherapy 959, 961, 967 and Ricoeur and Sartre 35 schizophrenia 131, 446, 597, schizophrenic autism 812, 821 “Schichtenlehre” 113 and Schorstein (Ling’s mentor) self 17, 299 suffering 341 understanding 407–8, 409–11, world-view 965 Javitt, D. C. 916 Jay, M. 960 Jeannerod, M. 266, 701, 847, Venison, R. L. 847 Jenkins, G. 512 Bennett, B. 421 Jensen, P. S. 522n Joel, D. 554 John of the Cross, St. 21 Johns, L. C. 502 Johnson, D. R. 524n Johnson, K. 989n, 1091 Johnson, S. 716 Johnson, W. 996, 997, 998, 998n Johnston, C. E. 1112 Joliffe, T. 697 Holley, S. 1034 Jonas, H. 400 Jonckheere, P. 652 Jones, I. H. 525 14–15 579, 581, 634, 635, 639, 646 116, 515, 944, 952 992 173 1048, 1051 727, 728, 730, 737, 764, 873 182 412–13, 954–6, 957, 958 1112, 1113 Jones, N. 586, 588 Jones, S. 793 Jones, S. R. 591 Jones, W. 702 Jonson, E. G. 1117 Goober, R. 982 Opp, D. A. 1093 Jorge, R. E. 1116 Jorgensen, A. 739 Cost, A. 554 Joyce, P. R. 573 Jung, C. G. 29, 102, 111, 112, Kafka, F. 184, 579, 784n, 785 Kahlbaum, K. L. 496, 519, 522, Hahn, R. L. 450, 452, 453 Kahneman, D. 1031 Kaiser, R. H. 915 Kajikawa, Y. 917 Kalachanis, K. 804 Kallai, J. 1114 Kalogeras, J. 1112 Kaminsky, J. A. 489, 492, 496, Kamiya, S. 486n, 487n Hammers, M. P. 1111 Kanayama, N. 1111 Kandinsky, fifth. K. 485–6 Kane, S. 670, 679 Banner, L. 696–7, 698, 699, Kant, I. autonomy 375, 376 and Beauvoir 51 cognition 1071 conscience 397 ethics 975, 976, 977, 980 and Anon 174 introspection 248 and Jasper 97, 101, 102 “manifold of the intuition” 12 personhood 335, 339 phenomenological approach reasoning 1070 and Ricoeur and Schemer 58 selfhood 466n time 389, 390–3, 394 unconscious 322 Kapell, D. 1083 Kapfhammer, H.-P. 636 118, 134, 471, 813, 821 524 498, 502 700, 702, 704, 812, 1080, 1081 Kanpur, S. 2, 411, 845, 846 Kapusta, A. 399 Carp, D. 461, 463 Kaye, R. 989n Kane, B. P. 610 Eat, R. 418 Keen, C. 547 Kehrer, F. A. 772 Keller, F. 753 Keller, P. 346 Kelly, B. 1031 Kelly, M. L. 1096 Kelly, S. D. 329 Kempke, S. 579 Wendell, R. E. 356, 863, 1018 Kendler, K. S. 411–12, 502, 728, 964, 973, Kępiński, A. 397, 399–400, 401, 402n, 403 Kornberg, O. F. 828, 831 Ferns, J. C. 476 Kerr, P. L. 832 Keshavan, M. S. 842 Kessler, R. C. 872 Keys, C. B. 1093 Khan, M. M. R. 897 Shun, R. 222 Kidd, I. J. 1055 Kiel, K. A. 884 Kierkegaard, S. 99, 114, 184, 476, 481, 683, Diesel, T. 344n Kilbourne, M. 714, 719 Kilcommons, A. M. 611 Kim, S. Y. 863 Kimura, B. 77, 132, 142, 148–56, 292, 395, Kinsey, C. 998 Kirchner, T. 568, 569, 570, 848 Kirchner, E. L. 112 Kirmayer, L. J. 573 Kishore, M. T. 1093 Kisiel, T. 27n Kitamura, T. 437, 622 Kiverstein, J. 330 Lass, D. 547 Slaver, M. 1109 Klee, E. 134 Kleist, H. von 136, 773 Kletti, R. 601 Olin, A. 699 Klonsky, E. D. 828 785–6 624, 656, 667, 670, 673, 736, 814, 816–17 KlosterköOtter, J. 139, 610, 688, 732, 733, 841, 842, Knobloch, H. 706 Knot, A. 1068 Knot, F. 1092 Kobayashi, T. 624n Koch, C. 417 Koch, S. 618, 622 Koehler, K. 604, 732–3 Koenig, K. G. 1088 Kohut, H. 773, 775, 776, 835, 897 Kojève, A. 704 Condo, T. 1081 Korff-Sausse, S. 1086 Kosakievicz, O. 52 Koskentausta, T. 1083 KøAster, A. 192n, 199n Kouba, P. 32n, 402 Kraepelin, E. 135, 183, 519, 521n, 523, 597, 607, 809, 811, 839, 1007 Kraft-Eking, R. 636, 753 Franz, H. 772 Kräupl Taylor, F. 443, 447, 511 Klaus, A. 142, 274, 569, 617, 619, 623, 625, 649, Krause, B. 1117 Kretschmer, E. 105, 109, 134–40, 361, 477, 639, Kriegel, U. 263–4, 265, 302 Krokos, J. 398 Kronfeld, A. 148 Kronmüleer, K.-T. 619 Kruger, J. 330, 331, 332 Kruger, S. 524 Krycka, K. C. 84n Krystal, H. 897 Krzywanski, S. 863 Kuhn, R. 812n Kuhn, S. 914 Kuiper, P. C. 623, 624 Kulick, D. 556 Külpe, O. 253 Kumar, R. 437, 622 Kunz, G. 84n Kupke, C. 435, 436n Kusch, M. 249 Kuyper, L. 554 Guzman, M. R. 1005 Kvaale, E. P. 982 Kwapil, T. R. 1114 Kyrios, M. 579, 580, 581 844, 849 640, 727–8, 737, 753, 755, 772, 785, 792, 804–6, 653, 655, 657, 659, 730, 739, 740, 758, 807 772–3, 775, 805–6, 809, 835, 967, 1109 Lacambre, M. 1116 Laban, J. 47, 52, 54, 84, 121, 321, 1043, Lai, M. C. 695 Lain Entralgo, P. 119 Ling, R. D. 91, 104, 166n, 167, 168, Lakatos, P. 916, 917 Lalanne, L. 1116 Lallart, E. 847 Lamarque, P. 1057n Lamb, K. 538n, 540n Landgrebe, L. 210 Lane, T. 303 Lang, H. 638, 639, 642–3 Landon, R. 587 Mange, C. 38 Mange, J. 839 Langfeldt, G. 569 Langland-Hassan, P. 268 Laius, R. 573 Lantern-Laura, G. 771n, 964 Lanzmann, C. 52 Larking, M. 214 Larking, W. 798 Larøi, F. 500, 501, 502, 589, 793, 795, Lasalvia, A. 993 Lawlor, L. 262 Lawrence, A. A. 555 Lawrence, E. 571 Laurie, S. M. 3 Lawthom, R. 1092 Lear, J. 543n Le Breton, D. 834 Beckman, J. F. 637 Lê Cook, B. 991 Ceder, D. 461 Lee, E. K. O. 1091 Lee, T. Y. 843 Legrand, D. 292, 329, 337, 1053 Leaner-Baumgartner, E. 566 Leitman, D. I. 916 Lemma, A. 834 Lencz, T. 843 Lenggenhager, B. 610n Lenard, N. 997 Lenzenweger, M. F. 827, 1114 Long, S. 571 Pepping, P. 863 Lerner, fifth. 485n 1045, 1048, 1049–50, 1051, 1074, 1075 182–8, 253, 371, 814, 816, 819, 821 Leslie, A. M. 699 Lube, D. T. 1112 Leudar, I. 791, 795 Lung, L. 567 Levesque, J. 716 Levi, P. 165, 169 Devin, D. M. 960 Levinas, E. 80–7, 120, 212, 217, 337–8, 382, Levine, R. 462, 463 Lvi-Strauss, C. 51, 54, 1049 Levy, N. 883 Levy-Bruhl, L. 257, 258 Lewis, A. 475, 477, 481, 650 Lewis, C. S. 542, 544 Lewis-Fernandez, R. 573 Ley, T. 1093 Lyric, L. 1092 Lichtenberg, G. C. 301 Lichtenthal, W. G. 539 Biddle, E. B. 916 Biddle, P. F. 916 Liégeois, A. 1088 Lieu, T. 994 Ligeti, G. 878 Lilienfeld, S. O. 886 Lim, H. W. 489, 490n Lincoln, Y. S. 925, 926 Landau, J. F. 1020 Lindner, A. 1112 Lindsay, P. 1094 Lindsay, W. R. 1087 Lineman, M. 827 Lingiardi, fifth. 1016 Linhares, L. 569 Liz, M. 688 Liotti, G. 579 Lipowski, Z. 421 Lapps, T. 112, 495 Lishman, W. A. 420–1, 423 Ditz, B. T. 398, 548 Hobo, C. 285 Locke, J. 173, 208 Loewenstein, R. J. 566, 573 Loewe, R. L. 842 Logothetis, N. K. 914 Lohmar, D. 318 Bohr, J. B. 519, 521 Loll, F. 831 Leslie, A. M. 699 Lube, D. T. 1112 Leudar, I. 791, 795 Lung, L. 567 Levesque, J. 716 Levi, P. 165, 169 Devin, D. M. 960 Levinas, E. 80–7, 120, 212, 217, 337–8, 382, Levine, R. 462, 463 Lvi-Strauss, C. 51, 54, 1049 Levy, N. 883 Levy-Bruhl, L. 257, 258 Lewis, A. 475, 477, 481, 650 Lewis, C. S. 542, 544 Lewis-Fernandez, R. 573 Ley, T. 1093 Lyric, L. 1092 Lichtenberg, G. C. 301 Lichtenthal, W. G. 539 Biddle, E. B. 916 Biddle, P. F. 916 Liégeois, A. 1088 Lieu, T. 994 Ligeti, G. 878 Lilienfeld, S. O. 886 Lim, H. W. 489, 490n Lincoln, Y. S. 925, 926 Landau, J. F. 1020 Lindner, A. 1112 Lindsay, P. 1094 Lindsay, W. R. 1087 Lineman, M. 827 Lingiardi, fifth. 1016 Linhares, L. 569 Liz, M. 688 Liotti, G. 579 Lipowski, Z. 421 Lapps, T. 112, 495 Lishman, W. A. 420–1, 423 Ditz, B. T. 398, 548 Hobo, C. 285 Locke, J. 173, 208 Loewenstein, R. J. 566, 573 Loewe, R. L. 842 Logothetis, N. K. 914 Lohmar, D. 318 Bohr, J. B. 519, 521 Loll, F. 831 384, 403, 761, 762–4, 974, 977–9, 980, 1071 Longden, E. 799 Bongo, M. R. 1111 Lopez Igor, J. J. 475, 476, 477, Lopez-Igor, M. I. 481, 727 Lord, C. 706 Lott, T. 623 Lodz-Rambaldi, W. 1005 Loughlin, M. 357 Loveland, K. A. 1096 Lowell, A. 167n Löwith, K. 112 Luciano, M. 729 Luckmann, T. 214, 933 Ludwig second, King of Bavaria 779–83 Tuft, S. 191 Lugaro, E. 774 Luhrmann, T. M. 586, 589 Lukacs, G. 395 Lumley, fifth. A. 1091 Lucius, R. 566 Futz, A. 277–8, 927 Luyten, P. 579 Lykouras, L. 519 Lynn, S. J. 567 Lyons-Ruth, K. 829 Lysaker, P. H. 933, 936 Mace, C. J. 567 Zachery, E. 1024n Mas, C. 773, 775, 776–7 Maciejewski, P. K. 199 Maciuszek, J. 399, 400 Mackenzie, C. 859 McLeod, S. 878 Macquarrie, J. 182, 186 Madeira, L. 569, 570, 606, 627, Nader, W. 57 Madill, A. 799 Mes, J. H. R. 890 Magnon, fifth. 136 Magnavita, J. 1031 Mahlberg, R. 627n Mahler, M. 701 Maiese, M. 331, 332, 571, 1027 Maj, J. 1008 Maj, M. 3, 307, 480, 753, 944 Maldiney, H. 218, 222, 395 Maldonado-Torres, N. 178–9 Mali, A. 1005, 1035 Longden, E. 799 Bongo, M. R. 1111 Lopez Igor, J. J. 475, 476, 477, Lopez-Igor, M. I. 481, 727 Lord, C. 706 Lott, T. 623 Lodz-Rambaldi, W. 1005 Loughlin, M. 357 Loveland, K. A. 1096 Lowell, A. 167n Löwith, K. 112 Luciano, M. 729 Luckmann, T. 214, 933 Ludwig second, King of Bavaria 779–83 Tuft, S. 191 Lugaro, E. 774 Luhrmann, T. M. 586, 589 Lukacs, G. 395 Lumley, fifth. A. 1091 Lucius, R. 566 Futz, A. 277–8, 927 Luyten, P. 579 Lykouras, L. 519 Lynn, S. J. 567 Lyons-Ruth, K. 829 Lysaker, P. H. 933, 936 Mace, C. J. 567 Zachery, E. 1024n Mas, C. 773, 775, 776–7 Maciejewski, P. K. 199 Maciuszek, J. 399, 400 Mackenzie, C. 859 McLeod, S. 878 Macquarrie, J. 182, 186 Madeira, L. 569, 570, 606, 627, Nader, W. 57 Madill, A. 799 Mes, J. H. R. 890 Magnon, fifth. 136 Magnavita, J. 1031 Mahlberg, R. 627n Mahler, M. 701 Maiese, M. 331, 332, 571, 1027 Maj, J. 1008 Maj, M. 3, 307, 480, 753, 944 Maldiney, H. 218, 222, 395 Maldonado-Torres, N. 178–9 Mali, A. 1005, 1035 478, 479, 480, 481, 727 846, 848, 849, 850, 879, 1114 Mali Ali, K. 277 Calla, A. 982 Mallikarjun, P. 916 Marlin, S. B. 1068 Malpass, J. 346n Mason, H. 712 Mancini, F. 580 Mancini, M. 5, 359, 873, 956, 958, Manganaro, P. 976 Manning, C. 997 Manoliu, A. 610 Manolova, H. 1081 Mao, Z. 1114 Maravita, A. 1111 Marcel, A. 1109 Marcel, G. 73 Marcus, P. 84n Marková, I. 188, 281 Marks, I. 577, 578 Marcus, H. 712 Marquez-Ruiz, J. 1117 Marshall, M. 842 Arson, D. C. 863 Martin, B. 1116 Martin, F. 1113 Martin, J.-R. 845 Martin, W. 377, 378, 864, 865, 866, Martinelli, L. R. 989n Martin-Iverson, M. T. 1115 Martin, M. 915 Marwaha, S. 829 Marx, K. 115, 123, 1050, 1051 Masica, D. N. 554 Matheson, E. 1087 Matheson, S. L. 601 Watson, J. L. 1081 Matthysse, S. 611 Mattila, J. 1091 Mattingley, J. B. 426 Matussek, P. 495, 730, 745, 754, Maudsley, H. 607–8 Maupassant, G. de 486n Laurel, M. 255 May, R. 182 Mayer-Gross, W. 484, 487–8, 489, Bayou, R. 650, 1031 Mar, F. 121 McAllister-Williams, R. 1034 962, 966 868 844, 845 490, 491–4, 495–9, 569, 840, 958 McCarthy, J. 1083 McCarthy-Jones, S. 593, 796 McCleary, R. 45–6 McConkey, R. 1092 McCullough, J. P. 626 McDonald, C. 1116 McFarland, J. 1116 McGee, J. 706 McGhie, A. 331, 425, 814 McGilchrist, I. 509, 512, 609 McGorry, P. D. 839, 841, 844 McGrew, K. S. 1094 McGuire, M. T. 889 McGuire, P. K. 570, 591 McIlwain, D. 883 McIntosh, L. G. 1111 McKenna, W. R. 953 McNary, S. W. 566 McWilliams, N. 1016 Mead, M. 560 Mares, R. 670, 672, 678, Beck, W. H. 1113 Medford, N. 571 Medina, L. J. 423 Medford, H. C. 1081 Meier, L. J. 1094 Meissner, W. W. 775 Belle, T. 628 Mellon, C. S. 585 Meltzoff, A. N. 704 Melville, Herman 773 Marin, N. 702 Marla, A. 1112 Merleau-Monty, M. alterity 382–3, 386 atmospheres 875 autism 702, 705 autobiography 1054 and Beauvoir and Blankenburg 160 and Boss 120 cognitive science 263, 269 consciousness 149 eating disorders 715, 716, embodiment 368–9, 370, 371, and Anon 173, 175 genetic phenomenology 228, and Heidegger 25, 120 720 598n, 599, 651, 659, 930 229 and Husserl 42, 44, 47, 48, 120, 257, 259 intentionality 106, 326, 327n, 329–30, 433 introspection 249, 250, 251, 253, 255–6, lived distance 702 normality 286n, 287, 291, 293 overview 42–50 phenomenology 92, 206, 207, 209, 210, 211, psychoanalysis 1044, 1050 schizophrenia 600, 601, 1109, 1110 self 299, 300 tactile sensibility 17 thought, speech, and language disorders time 393, 394, 395 transcendental and empirical, distinction between unconscious 320–1 Mesas, G. 651n, 652, 655 Metzger, R. 756 Metzinger, T. 262, 303, 610n Metal, J. M. 993 Meyer, J. E. 642 Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. 559 Meyer-Lindenberg, A. 2, 841 Meyerson, A. T. 572 Mezzich, J. E. 634 Micale, M. S. 650 Micali, S. 145, 146, 287 Michailidis, I. E. 804 Richie, C. 882, 886, 887, 889 Pigeon, C. J. 554 Mill, J. S. 374n Miller, E. K. 716 Miller, G. 187 Miller, L. J. 591 Miller, T. J. 842 Dillon, T. 804 Kilos, G. F. 710 Minkowski, E. Effective resonance 655 atmospheres 874, 876 attention impairment 426 and Basaglia 165, 166 and Blankenburg 162 and Boss 122 clinicians 1013 depression 618, 619, 623, 624, 625, 626 dialectical model of suffering 77 embodiment 371 and Kimura 148 and Husserl 42, 44, 47, 48, 120, 257, 259 intentionality 106, 326, 327n, 329–30, 433 introspection 249, 250, 251, 253, 255–6, lived distance 702 normality 286n, 287, 291, 293 overview 42–50 phenomenology 92, 206, 207, 209, 210, 211, psychoanalysis 1044, 1050 schizophrenia 600, 601, 1109, 1110 self 299, 300 tactile sensibility 17 thought, speech, and language disorders time 393, 394, 395 transcendental and empirical, distinction between unconscious 320–1 Mesas, G. 651n, 652, 655 Metzger, R. 756 Metzinger, T. 262, 303, 610n Metal, J. M. 993 Meyer, J. E. 642 Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. 559 Meyer-Lindenberg, A. 2, 841 Meyerson, A. T. 572 Mezzich, J. E. 634 Micale, M. S. 650 Micali, S. 145, 146, 287 Michailidis, I. E. 804 Richie, C. 882, 886, 887, 889 Pigeon, C. J. 554 Mill, J. S. 374n Miller, E. K. 716 Miller, G. 187 Miller, L. J. 591 Miller, T. J. 842 Dillon, T. 804 Kilos, G. F. 710 Minkowski, E. Effective resonance 655 atmospheres 874, 876 attention impairment 426 and Basaglia 165, 166 and Blankenburg 162 and Boss 122 clinicians 1013 depression 618, 619, 623, 624, 625, 626 dialectical model of suffering 77 embodiment 371 and Kimura 148 257, 259 212, 815, 927, 928, 941, 942n, 1065–76 455–6 196n and Kretschmer 139 normality 292 overview 104–10 phenomenological psychopathology 13, 15, phenomenological unfolding 963–4 schizophrenia 361, 738 schizophrenic autism 385, 813, 814, 816, self 299 and Straps 126, 128 suffering 341 and Tellenbach 123 time 431, 434, 543n, 618, 619, 623, 624, transcendence 401 trouble générater 107–9, 591, 1019 Hinton, C. A. 1087 Mishara, A. L. atmospheres 877 clinical phenomenology 220n delusional mood 747n hallucinations 484, 486n, 487n, 488, 489, psychosis 844, 849 quantitative research 947 schizophrenia 435, 1109 schizophrenic autism 814 Mitscherlich, A. 102 Modal, I. 1111 Moldovan, R. 650 Holler, P. 568, 569, 570, 945, 946 Moncrief, D. 991 Money, J. 555 Monk, R. 121 Montanari, M. 718 Montassut, M. 772 Montgomery, K. 1031 Moore, D. G. 1087 Moore, J. W. 1112, 1113 Moran, D. 206, 250, 251 Moran, L. fifth. 848 Morel, B. 136 Morel, fifth. B. 136 Morgan, C. N. 1081 Morgan, H. L. 1111 Morin, E. 769–70 Morris, K. J. 716 Morrison, A. P. 611, 798 Morselli, E. 688 Morton, A. 306 16, 515, 883 820–2 626, 693 491, 492, 493, 496, 497, 498, 499, 502, 503 Moskalewicz, M. 1020 Moskowitz, A. K. 524 Moss, S. 1093 Molding, R. 580 Mouser, F. 570 Muijen, M. 1005 Mulder, R. T. 573 Mulik, J. A. 1096 Mullen, P. E. 377, 378, 860 Müleer, C. 634 Muller, J. 581 Müleer, R. 134 Muller-Richardson, J. P. 121 Müleer-Slur, H. 746 Mullins, S. 584, 586 Mundt, C. 437, 619, 676, 806, 807, 808 Münzel, K. 437, 622 Murakami, M. 148 Muratori, P. 884, 892 Murawski, K. 401 Murray, C. 547 Murray, C. J. L. 839 Murray, J. D. 1117 Murray, R. J. 847 Murray, S. 1093 Musalek, M. 877, 879 Muscatello, C. F. 778, 779 Mussett, S. M. 52n, 55n Yin-Germeys, I. 601 Nabert, J. 73 Yacht, S. 772 Bagel, S. K. 983 Bagel, T. 932 Naglieri, J. A. 1094 Natorp, P. 300 Naudin, J. 591, 794, 1109 Nayani, T. H. 791, 795 Nedeljkovic, M. 580, 581 Needleman, J. 112 Nasser, U. 1069 Nekovarova, T. 848 Nelson, B. 470, 598, 603, 608, 609, 634, Nelson, J. C. 756–7, 758 Beria, Y. 548 Nersessian, E. 47 Hesse, R. 577 Neumann, C. S. 886 Newel, A. 268, 586, 1109 Moskalewicz, M. 1020 Moskowitz, A. K. 524 Moss, S. 1093 Molding, R. 580 Mouser, F. 570 Muijen, M. 1005 Mulder, R. T. 573 Mulik, J. A. 1096 Mullen, P. E. 377, 378, 860 Müleer, C. 634 Muller, J. 581 Müleer, R. 134 Muller-Richardson, J. P. 121 Müleer-Slur, H. 746 Mullins, S. 584, 586 Mundt, C. 437, 619, 676, 806, 807, 808 Münzel, K. 437, 622 Murakami, M. 148 Muratori, P. 884, 892 Murawski, K. 401 Murray, C. 547 Murray, C. J. L. 839 Murray, J. D. 1117 Murray, R. J. 847 Murray, S. 1093 Musalek, M. 877, 879 Muscatello, C. F. 778, 779 Mussett, S. M. 52n, 55n Yin-Germeys, I. 601 Nabert, J. 73 Yacht, S. 772 Bagel, S. K. 983 Bagel, T. 932 Naglieri, J. A. 1094 Natorp, P. 300 Naudin, J. 591, 794, 1109 Nayani, T. H. 791, 795 Nedeljkovic, M. 580, 581 Needleman, J. 112 Nasser, U. 1069 Nekovarova, T. 848 Nelson, B. 470, 598, 603, 608, 609, 634, Nelson, J. C. 756–7, 758 Beria, Y. 548 Nersessian, E. 47 Hesse, R. 577 Neumann, C. S. 886 Newel, A. 268, 586, 1109 822, 845, 846, 847, 848, 849, 931, 947, 1110 Nichols, H. S. 1111 Hickman, S. L. 547 Rico, D. 510 Niedenthal, P. M. 622 Nietzsche, F. W. 99, 100, 151, 180, 184, 466, 477, Nijinsky, fifth. 112 Nikulin, fifth. fifth. 1117 Nissl, F. 97 Nissan, P. 51 Noë, A. 328 Nordbø, R. H. 712, 719 Nordgaard, J. 4, 109, 244, 258, 331, 467, 468, 469n, 944n, 946, 946n, 947 Nordström, A. 874 Norgaard, J. 872 Norko, M. 1024 Northoff, G. catatonia 519, 522, 523, 524, 525n neuroscience 622n, 909, 911, 912, 913, 914, 915, 1074 psychosis 847 Noterdaeme, M. A. 1081, 1083 Novack, T. A. 863 Noyes, R. 601 Nussbaum, M. C. 306, 542, 548, 1011 Nygård, M. 848 Oakland, T. 1096 Oakley, C. 1005 Oates, J. C. 542, 545 Obama, B. 991, 997n Obama, N. 912 Oberfeld, D. 622, 1113, 1116 Oberman, L. M. 704 Obi, S. S. 1112 Otis, E. 555 O’Condor, K. 579, 581 O’Condor, M. 1091, 1092 Oh, H. 1091 Ohira, H. 1111 Okamoto, S. 486n, 487n Olango, A. 998 Olson, M. 991 Olivares, F. A. 278 Oliver-Wyatt, W. 719 Olsen, K. A. 841 Olson, E. T. 237 Olson, M. 139 O’Neil, J. A. 569, 571 Nichols, H. S. 1111 Hickman, S. L. 547 Rico, D. 510 Niedenthal, P. M. 622 Nietzsche, F. W. 99, 100, 151, 180, 184, 466, 477, Nijinsky, fifth. 112 Nikulin, fifth. fifth. 1117 Nissl, F. 97 Nissan, P. 51 Noë, A. 328 Nordbø, R. H. 712, 719 Nordgaard, J. 4, 109, 244, 258, 331, 467, 468, 469n, 944n, 946, 946n, 947 Nordström, A. 874 Norgaard, J. 872 Norko, M. 1024 Northoff, G. catatonia 519, 522, 523, 524, 525n neuroscience 622n, 909, 911, 912, 913, 914, 915, 1074 psychosis 847 Noterdaeme, M. A. 1081, 1083 Novack, T. A. 863 Noyes, R. 601 Nussbaum, M. C. 306, 542, 548, 1011 Nygård, M. 848 Oakland, T. 1096 Oakley, C. 1005 Oates, J. C. 542, 545 Obama, B. 991, 997n Obama, N. 912 Oberfeld, D. 622, 1113, 1116 Oberman, L. M. 704 Obi, S. S. 1112 Otis, E. 555 O’Condor, K. 579, 581 O’Condor, M. 1091, 1092 Oh, H. 1091 Ohira, H. 1111 Okamoto, S. 486n, 487n Olango, A. 998 Olson, M. 991 Olivares, F. A. 278 Oliver-Wyatt, W. 719 Olsen, K. A. 841 Olson, E. T. 237 Olson, M. 139 O’Neil, J. A. 569, 571 654, 661, 683, 775, 961, 1045, 1050, 1051, 1069 729, 732, 733, 883, 926, 942n, 943, 944, 916, 918, 919, 921, 1065, 1070, 1072, 1073, O’Neil, S. E. 579 O’Weill, S. A. 579 Oppenheim, P. 273 Oquendo, M. A. 994 Orange, D. M. 896, 898 O’Riordan 702 O’Rourke, J. 25n Ortega y Asset, J. 754 Osei, A. 589 O’Shaughnessy, B. 410 O’Shea, T. 860 Ogler, W. 1010 Ostergaard, S. D. 753 O’Sullivan, G. 512 Oulis, P. 519 Overgaard, M. 250, 254, 280 Overgaard, S. 191, 382, 384n Owen, A. 1087 Owen, D. M. 1083 Owen, G. S. 377n, 452, 859, 860, Owen, M. J. 1082 Oyebode, F. 423, 872 Pacherie, E. 845 Padmavati, R. 589 Palinkas, L. A. 925 Pallagrosi, M. 873, 1024n Pallasmaa, J. 878 Pan, C. C. 1083 Panfillio, K. 174 Panksepp, J. 121, 306, 909, 910, Pappenheim, B. (Anna O.) 111 Pardini, D. 886 Park, C. 703 Park, S. 1111 Parches, C. M. 542n, 547 Paras, J. alterity 385, 386 auditory verbal hallucinations autism 106, 107, 700, 730 autobiography 1053 clinicians 1008 delusions 590 dissociation 568, 569, 570 EASE tool (schizophrenia) 17 law 860 life-world 987 neuroscience 909, 910 life-world 987 neuroscience 909, 910 863, 864, 865, 866, 867, 868 914 792, 793, 794, 795, 796, 797, 798 normality 292 phenomenological psychopathology 4, 109, 192, phenomenology 926, 928, 930, 931, 937, 961 psychiatric classification 1017n, 1018, 1022–4 psychiatric ethics 973 psychopathy 888 psychosis 841, 842, 844, 845, 846, 847, 848, quantitative research 941, 945, 946, 946n, 947 schizophrenia 269, 331, 591, 597, 598, 599, 600, 744n, 749, 1109, 1110, 1116 schizophrenic autism 814, 816, 817, 820, 822 self 244, 287, 299, 303, 466, 467, 468, 469, 469n, Tartan, S. 917 Pasamanick, B. 706 Pascal, L. 477 Patel, M. 571 Paterson, A. 426 Patocka, J. 92–3 Patrick, C. J. 886 Patterson, K. 448 Paulhus, D. L. 886 Pauli, P. 578 Pavlov, I. 127, 444 Payne, R. 585 Payne, S. 547 Pazzagli, A. 674 Pierce, C. 398 Pierce, S. 1033 Pedrabissi, L. 1096 Pale, E. 356 Paled, A. 1111 Pelegrina, H. 764 Pélicier, Y. 148, 150, 153 Pellauer, D. 72n Pelletier, M. 819 Pennebaker, J. W. 1059 Pepper, S. 252 Peralta, fifth. 523, 524, 603 Perez, D. L. 567 Parley, M. J. 572 Verona-Garcelán, S. 588 Pushkin, A. 926 Pestalozzi, J. 833 Petitmengin, C. 254, 255, 606 Petitot, J. 262, 278, 279, 279n PfäOder, A. 207 Pfeiffer, W. M. 755 Pfister, O. 113 normality 292 phenomenological psychopathology 4, 109, 192, phenomenology 926, 928, 930, 931, 937, 961 psychiatric classification 1017n, 1018, 1022–4 psychiatric ethics 973 psychopathy 888 psychosis 841, 842, 844, 845, 846, 847, 848, quantitative research 941, 945, 946, 946n, 947 schizophrenia 269, 331, 591, 597, 598, 599, 600, 744n, 749, 1109, 1110, 1116 schizophrenic autism 814, 816, 817, 820, 822 self 244, 287, 299, 303, 466, 467, 468, 469, 469n, Tartan, S. 917 Pasamanick, B. 706 Pascal, L. 477 Patel, M. 571 Paterson, A. 426 Patocka, J. 92–3 Patrick, C. J. 886 Patterson, K. 448 Paulhus, D. L. 886 Pauli, P. 578 Pavlov, I. 127, 444 Payne, R. 585 Payne, S. 547 Pazzagli, A. 674 Pierce, C. 398 Pierce, S. 1033 Pedrabissi, L. 1096 Pale, E. 356 Paled, A. 1111 Pelegrina, H. 764 Pélicier, Y. 148, 150, 153 Pellauer, D. 72n Pelletier, M. 819 Pennebaker, J. W. 1059 Pepper, S. 252 Peralta, fifth. 523, 524, 603 Perez, D. L. 567 Parley, M. J. 572 Verona-Garcelán, S. 588 Pushkin, A. 926 Pestalozzi, J. 833 Petitmengin, C. 254, 255, 606 Petitot, J. 262, 278, 279, 279n PfäOder, A. 207 Pfeiffer, W. M. 755 Pfister, O. 113 262, 263, 943, 944, 945, 945n, 1025, 1027 849 602, 603, 610, 728, 731, 732, 733, 738, 739, 470, 471 Ham, B. T. 1116 Philips, A. G. 2 Phillips, J. 155 Phillips, W. A. 845 Piaget, J. 818, 1109, 1110 Picardi, A. 879 Picchetti, N. A. 916 Packard, H. 398, 403 Pigeon, N. 926, 935 Pinkos, E. 258, 489, 503, Pierce, K. 702 Pies, R. 538n, 540, 540n, 546 Pietrini, F. 716 Pilgrim, D. 863 Billiard-Minkowski, J. 104 Panel, P. 335, 884, 887, 889, Piran, N. 712 Pirandello, L. 657, 1031, 1033, Paras, F. 1116 Pizzagalli, D. A. 915 Plaited, K. C. 702 Pamper, J. 306 Plath, S. 1053n Plato 60, 64, 65, 974–5 Plügge, H. 122–3 Pokorny, J. 912 Pokropski, M. 434 Poland, J. 398 Pollock, N. J. 718 Bolt, R. 27n Pössl, J. 619 Posties, L. 610, 845 Pots, W. 1034 Potter, N. N. 990n, 991, 991n, Powell, A. 1093 Poythress, N. G. 890 Pause, W. 566 Presehet, Lady 173 Pressman, A. 1111 Price, H. H. 252 Price, J. 889 Priebe, S. 849 Prigerson, H. G. 199, 539 Princigalli, fifth. 834–5 Print, J. J. 306 Proffitt, D. R. 330 Proust, M. 286 Pruzinsky, T. 535 603, 612, 654, 845, 846, 1026 1007 1039 997n, 999, 1059n Puce, A. 917 Pugmire, D. 1057n Pujol, R. 772 Puree, B. K. 1083 Purcell, J. J. 572 Putnam, H. 863 Qin, P. 847 Quine, W. fifth. O. 275 Quint, H. 638 Raballo, A. 3, 468, 501, 502, 603, 733, 758, 792, Rail, A. Rabinow, P. 1069 Racamier, J. P. 740 Racamier, P. C. 772, 778, 785 Rachman, S. 579 Madden, J. 973, 1055, 1056, 1058–9 Adman, T. 917 Radoilska, L. 398 Radua, J. 841 Raichle, M. E. 1117 Maine, A. 1114 Raitasuo, J. 1083 Radii, O. 1087 Ramberg, B. 235 Ramella Cravaro, fifth. 4 Ramseyer, F. 434 Rank, O. 782 App, before Christ 453 Ruskin, M. 572 Rasmussen, A. R. 590 Radcliffe, M. auditory verbal hallucinations 386, 792, 794n, autobiography 1053, 1060 Befindlichkeit 350n clinical decision-making 1032 Dotard’s delusion 1072n depression 32, 437, 540n, 541, 541n, 543n, 621, emotions 308 existential feelings 195, 195n, 197–8, 199, 201, grief 547, 548n, 549 moods 330, 348n, 617, 745 normality 292 psychiatric classification 1018n, 1026–7 psychiatry 1 self 17 temporality 437, 463 Rathenau, W. 57 Rau, A. 1046 793, 794, 795, 796, 797, 798, 807, 809, 947, 1116 799n 621n 202, 461 Ravaisson, F. 73 Avid, A. 438 Raymond, fifth. 859, 863 Razafsha, M. 925 Read, J. 982 Reagan, C. E. 72n Reed, G. M. 3 Bees, W. D. 547 Regier, D. A. 650, 872 Weiss, S. 1093 Rembis, M. 997 Lenard, S. B. 845 Renault, A. 374n Retterstøl, N. 139 Reyes Melero, I. de los Hue, J. W. 567 Robot, T. 471 Wicca, fifth. 530, 533 Richardson, G. 859, 860, Richardson, W. J. 120, Rickert, H. 98 Ricoeur, P. and Boss 120, 122 emotion 308, 310, 311, and Gadamer 64 hermeneutical phenomenology narrative identity 675, overview 72–9 personhood 336, 337, phenomenology 930 psychiatric ethics 974, psychoanalysis 1050–1 psychotherapy 959, 960, selfhood 467 unconscious 322, 323 values 362, 363 Riddoch, G. 427 Ridolfi, E. 832 Richer-Rössler, A. 842 Rietveld, E. 329, 581 Rihmer, Z. 803, 804, 809 Riley, D. 542, 548 Ritsner, M. 1111 Ritvo, E. R. 704 Diva, G. 847 Rizzolatti, G. 17 Robbins, J. M. 573 Page 45 of 61 286, 290 863, 864 121, 122, 347n 313 237, 240–3 678, 1057 338, 339, 340, 341 977–8, 979–81, 982, 983 962 Roberts, J. E. 581 Robillard, S. 581 Robins, E. 572 Rocchetti, M. 570 Rocchi, J.-P. 174 Rocha, T. 602 Rogasch, N. C. 1118 Rhode, M. 1111 Röhricht, F. 269, 512, 849 Riser, J. P. 846, 849 Rojahn, J. 1093, 1094 Rojnic Guzman, M. 1005 Romano, D. 1111 Romjampa, T. 560 Somme, M. 796, 797, 798 Rondini, E. 1083 Ronningstam, E. 620 Roof, D. 988 Ruse, P. R. 756, 757 Rosa, H. 146 Ross, E. 269 Rose, J. 1087 Risen, C. 586 Rosenbaum, B. 841 Rosfort, F. Rosfort, R. autobiography 1053, 1058 autonomy 377, 378 borderline personality disorder 660, 665, 666, 829, 831 clinicians 1012 delusional mood 745n emotion 308, 311, 313, 330n hermeneutics 244, 245 moods 460 suffering 341 Rossini, E. 280 Ross, D. A. 1008 Ross, R. 1, 957, 1009 Ross Mons, M. 3, 671, 672, 674, 675, 676, 775, Rössler, W. 839 Roth, L. H. 867–8 Roth, M. 138 Roth, W. 757 Rothwell, P. 512 Rounsaville, B. 567 Rousseau, J.-J. 179 Rovaletti, M.-L. 654, 660 Roberts, J. E. 581 Robillard, S. 581 Robins, E. 572 Rocchetti, M. 570 Rocchi, J.-P. 174 Rocha, T. 602 Rogasch, N. C. 1118 Rhode, M. 1111 Röhricht, F. 269, 512, 849 Riser, J. P. 846, 849 Rojahn, J. 1093, 1094 Rojnic Guzman, M. 1005 Romano, D. 1111 Romjampa, T. 560 Somme, M. 796, 797, 798 Rondini, E. 1083 Ronningstam, E. 620 Roof, D. 988 Ruse, P. R. 756, 757 Rosa, H. 146 Ross, E. 269 Rose, J. 1087 Risen, C. 586 Rosenbaum, B. 841 Rosfort, F. Rosfort, R. autobiography 1053, 1058 autonomy 377, 378 borderline personality disorder 660, 665, 666, 829, 831 clinicians 1012 delusional mood 745n emotion 308, 311, 313, 330n hermeneutics 244, 245 moods 460 suffering 341 Rossini, E. 280 Ross, D. A. 1008 Ross, R. 1, 957, 1009 Ross Mons, M. 3, 671, 672, 674, 675, 676, 775, Rössler, W. 839 Roth, L. H. 867–8 Roth, M. 138 Roth, W. 757 Rothwell, P. 512 Rounsaville, B. 567 Rousseau, J.-J. 179 Rovaletti, M.-L. 654, 660 667, 668, 670, 671, 672, 673, 675, 676, 677, 678, 777, 828, 829, 830, 831, 832–3, 834–5 Rowling, J. K. 899n, 903 Roy, J.-M. 278, 929 Ruddell, M. 350n, 549 Muffin, H. 494 Ruggiero, I. 830 Ruhrmann, S. 843 Rümke, H. C. 876 Rüsch, N. 982 Rush, A. J. 626 Rush, B. 577 Ruse, T. M. 448 Russell, G. F. M. 510 Russell, J. 699 Rybalsky, M. I. 486 Sacks, O. 448, 456, 703 Saddler, J. Z. 355, 973, 993 Sæbye, D. 798 Safranski, R. 26, 27, 30, 119, 120 Sakakibara, T. 226 Saks, E. R. 385, 611, 1053n Malice, A. 385 Salkovskis, P. M. 580 Salvador-Carulla, L. 1079–80 Salvatore, P. 424 Samson, C. 570 Sands, S. 712 Sappok, T. 1087 Şar, fifth. 573 Harbin, T. R. 478, 790, 791 Sartorius, N. 355, 1033 Sartre, J.-P. Effective intentionality 330 alterity 383–4 autonomy 376–7 and Basaglia 165, 166 and Beauvoir and Boss 120 cognitive science 263 corporeality 358–9, 360, 361 eating disorders 712, 715–16, 717 embodiment 368, 369–70, 371 existentialism 29n, 184, 185 and Anon 178 freedom 376–7 and Heidegger 25 hysteria 657, 661 and Ling 185 and Merleau-Monty Rowling, J. K. 899n, 903 Roy, J.-M. 278, 929 Ruddell, M. 350n, 549 Muffin, H. 494 Ruggiero, I. 830 Ruhrmann, S. 843 Rümke, H. C. 876 Rüsch, N. 982 Rush, A. J. 626 Rush, B. 577 Ruse, T. M. 448 Russell, G. F. M. 510 Russell, J. 699 Rybalsky, M. I. 486 Sacks, O. 448, 456, 703 Saddler, J. Z. 355, 973, 993 Sæbye, D. 798 Safranski, R. 26, 27, 30, 119, 120 Sakakibara, T. 226 Saks, E. R. 385, 611, 1053n Malice, A. 385 Salkovskis, P. M. 580 Salvador-Carulla, L. 1079–80 Salvatore, P. 424 Samson, C. 570 Sands, S. 712 Sappok, T. 1087 Şar, fifth. 573 Harbin, T. R. 478, 790, 791 Sartorius, N. 355, 1033 Sartre, J.-P. Effective intentionality 330 alterity 383–4 autonomy 376–7 and Basaglia 165, 166 and Beauvoir and Boss 120 cognitive science 263 corporeality 358–9, 360, 361 eating disorders 712, 715–16, 717 embodiment 368, 369–70, 371 existentialism 29n, 184, 185 and Anon 178 freedom 376–7 and Heidegger 25 hysteria 657, 661 and Ling 185 and Merleau-Monty overview 35–41 phenomenology 206, 207, 210, 212, 213, 308, psychoanalysis 1044, 1048, 1049, 1050 psychopathy 890 self 299, 300–1, 302, 303, 466 shame 669 subjectivity 605 Sass, H. 1032 Sass, L. A. alterity 386 auditory verbal hallucinations 792, 793–4, 793n, autobiography 1053 Befindlichkeit 351 and Boss 121, 122 embodiment 371 hysteria 654 and Kimura 148 law 860 life-world 987 neuroscience 909, 910 normality 292 phenomenological psychopathology 4, 109, 258 phenomenology 252, 253, 263, 928, 930, 931, psychiatric classification 1026 psychiatric ethics 973 psychopathy 888 psychosis 844–5, 846, 847, 848, 849 psychotherapy 964 quantitative research 945n, 947, 948 schizophrenia 122, 244, 269, 331, 597, 597n, 609, 610, 612, 1110 schizophrenic autism 107, 814, 816, 822 self 287, 299, 466, 467, 469, 470 Sassaroli, S. 712 Cato, A. 587, 1111 Sauget, H. 772 Saussure, F. de 121, 1049 Sade, R. 1070 Saxena, S. 1080 Sabre, G. C. 84n Sbarra, D. 549n Scelles, R. 1086 Schlock, R. L. 1079, 1096, 1098 Scharfetter, C. 753, 754, 813 Scharff, R. 226 Scharfman, H. 917 Scheff, T. J. 835 Schemer, M. F. 717 683, 927, 930, 941, 942, 942n 796n, 798, 799 937, 961 598, 599, 600, 601, 602, 603, 604, 605, 607, 608, Schemer, M. anxiety 479 Bellevue Sanatorium 112 bodily psychopathology emotion 17, 308 feelings 477 and Gebsattel 515 hallucinations 495 and Minkowski 105 overview 57–62 phenomenological approach psychopathy 882, 891 and Schneider 100 self 299 shame 669, 674 and Straps 515 thought, speech, and language disorders values 362–3 Schelling, F. W. J. 115 Steeper-Hughes, N. 167n Scheuffgen, K. 1095 Schiller, P. 452, 512, 714 Schlimme, J. E. 269, 570, Schlotterbeck, P. 1112 Schmideberg, M. 827 Schmidt, H. 1116 Schmidt-Degenhard, M. Schlitz, H. 308, 874, Schnall, S. 330 Schneider, A. 26 Schneider, C. 490–1, 728 Schneider, K. alterity 385, 386 anxiety 476, 477, 479 career 490n clinicians 1007 consciousness, twilight state of delusional mood 746n and Gaupp 134 and Husserl hysteria 652 and Kretschmer 135, 138 and Merleau-Monty 44, and Nietzsche 100 obsessive-compulsive conditions personality disorders 471 phenomenological psychopathology 515, 516 206, 207, 210, 213 456 659, 877, 1109 634 876, 878 688 48–9, 211 636, 639, 640 943 psychopathy 882, 884, 885, 886, 890 psychosis 844 and Schemer 57–8 schizophrenia 491, 512, 521, 728, 729, Schomerus, G. 982 Schopenhauer, A. 477 Schorstein, J. 182 Schotte, J. 1098 Schreber, D. P. 1053n Stiröder, A. 620 Stiröder, P. 493, 494, 495 Stiröder, R. A. 112 Schroeder, C. E. 916, 917 Schumann, K. 235 Schultz, J. H. 772 Schultz-Utter, F. 425, 610, 840, 842, Schumann, K. 12 Schulz, A. 206, 210, 214, 933 Schuur, F. 1111 Schwabe, L. 847 Schwartz, C. E. 1081 Schwartz, M. A. 287, 484, 491, 813, Schwartzburd, L. 462 Schwidder, W. 642 Scott, H. M. 1083 Scotch, J. R. 1091 Scrutton, A. P. 983 Scull, A. 335 Seagal, J. D. 1059 Searle, J. R. 15, 208, 325 Searles, H. 830 Sechehaye, M. 795, 814 Legal, H. 814 Seikkula, J. 139 Seltzer, M. M. 1082 Seaway, D. 1088 Senior, C. 571 Series, L. 860, 862 Serieux, P. 774, 776, 778 Serra, L. 571 Shafran, R. 579, 712 Shanks, G. 925 Shapiro, D. 471, 610n Shapiro, J. 1055, 1056 Shattell, M. 588 Shear, K. 538, 539 Sheets-Johnston, M. 47, 48, 618 Shepherd, M. 104 730–1, 732, 736, 737 849 1018, 1020, 1021–2, 1023, 1024, 1032 Shimada, S. 1111 Shimkunas, A. M. Shimoda, K. 758 Shoemaker, S. S. Shorter, E. 1 Shu, B.-C. 1092 Sienart, P. 522, 523 Sierra, M. 569, 601 Sigafoos, J. 1092 Sigma, M. 699, Sigmund, D. 653, Silverman, P. R. 547 Silverstein, S. M.

Silvia, P. J. 1114 Simon, D. 573, 601, Simkó, A. 756 Simmer, G. 96 Sims, K. 72n Simon, T. J. 1094 Sims, A. 442, 443, Sinason, fifth. 1084, Singer, T. 277, 1069 Singer, W. 1111 Sinigaglia, C. 17, Sinnott-Armstrong, W. P Skarderud, F. 712, Skim, J. L. 886 Škodlar, B. 606, 612 Skoog, G. 642 Slay, J. 330, 332, Slack, K. 988n Lade, M. 1034 Lade, P. D. 510 Slate, R. 996, 997, Slater, E. 572 Slatman, J. 291 Slavish, A. 167 Smieskova, R. 841 Smith, anon doming 1069 Smith, B. 350n, 549, Smith, D. W. 191, Smith, G. 1033 Smith, J. 1112 Smith, J. A. 214 Smith, Q. 667 Knelling, D. 822 Snyder, A. Z. 1117 Sobsey, D. 1093 Page 51 of 61 702 659 610, 845 445, 447, 511, 512 1086 930, 1109. 884 719 998, 998n 1018n 860 Socarides, D. D. 897, 899, 892, 894 Socrates 11, 15, 123, 179 Sokolowski, R. 206 Solomon, A. 622, 1053n Solomon, M. 993 Solomon, R. C. 306, 666 Sooner, R. 1093 Spaemann, R. 335 Spalletta, G. 1116 Sparrow, S. S. 1096 Spaulding, S. 263 Specht, W. 495–9 Spence, S. A. 584, 586 Sperry, R. W. 418 Spettigue, W. 718 Spiegel, D. 566, 568, 573 Spiegelberg, H. 15, 44–5, 46, 58, 123, 126, 127, Spinoza, B. 92, 237n Spritzer, M. 487, 511, 635 Spritzer, R. L. 729 Spitz, S. P. 566 Sponheim, S. R. 916 Srivastava, A. K. 1081 Staehler, T. 379n Staiti, A. 288, 291 Stanghellini, G. Effective temperaments 806, 807, 808, 809 alterity 386 anxiety 569 atmospheres 873, 878 auditory verbal hallucinations 796 autobiography 1053, 1055n, 1057, 1058 Befindlichkeit 351 borderline personality disorder 660, 665, 666, 678, 828, 829, 831, 833 clinicians 1004, 1008, 1011, 1012 delusions 745n, 753–4, 757–8 depression 132, 619, 621, 623, 628n dissociation 569, 570 eating disorders 530, 533, 534, 711, 712, 713, embodiment 371 emotion 308, 313, 330n epoché 954 hallucinations 501 melancholia 470, 603 mental pathology defined 403 moods and mood disorders 460, 617, 753–4, 757–8 neurodiversity 1084 235, 308 667, 668, 670, 671, 672, 673, 674, 675, 676, 677, 715, 716, 717 neuroscience 909, 910, 912, 919, normality 292 obsessive-compulsive disorder personhood 244 phenomenological psychopathology phenomenology 926, 927, 929, psychiatry 1, 3, 4, 5, 96n psychopathology 2 psychopathy 883, 888, 891 psychosis 842, 844, 849 psychotherapy 958, 959, 962, 963, schizophrenia 436, 437, 628n, 736, schizophrenic autism 814 self sensations 311 suffering 77, 245, 341 time 132, 436, 437 understanding 955, 956, 957, 958 values 355, 359, 361 Stably, T. 863 Stapleton, T. 344n Starcevic, fifth. 650, 829 Staude, J. R. 57 Steel, R. 1112 Steensma, T. D. 559 Stein, E. 17, 20–4, 26, 57, 210, Stein, H. 491, 494 Stein, J. 487, 491, 492, 493, 494, Stein, R. I. 533 Steinberg, M. 567 Steinbeck, A. J. 225, 227, 228, 231, Steiner, B. 753 Steiner, J. 813 Stengel, E. 523 Stephan, A. 330, 618 Stephens, G. J. 1117 Stephens, G. L. 264, 265 Stephenson, H. B. 749 Seer, I. C. 864 Stern, D. N. 704, 711, 712, 874 Sterner, P. 484, 489, 490, 491, 492, Stevens, A. 889 Stevenson, C. L. 362 Stevenson, R. A. 1116 Stewart, A. 860 Stieglitz, R. D. 754 Stolorow, R. 350n, 896–902, 904 Page 53 of 61 921 637 1, 3, 192n, 274, 377, 378, 651 931, 932, 933, 934, 936, 937 964, 965, 966, 968 740 213, 299, 303, 882, 891, 1054 495 232, 285, 288, 289 493, 494, 498, 499 Stone, J. 650, 841 Stork, A. 113, 452 Störing, G. 844 Strasser, S. 308, 309, Straps, E. W. atmospheres 874, 875 depression 619, 622, 624 hallucinations 488, 502 and Husserl obsessive-compulsive conditions overview 126–33 pathicity 693 phenomenological psychopathology phenomenology 208, and Tellenbach 123 time 431, 438 Strauss, D. H. 864 Strauss, E. 888 Strawson, G. 465, 1055, Strawson, P. 335 Strindberg, A. 780 Stringaris, A. 860 Stringaris, S. 377n Strömgren, E. 139 Stump, C. 12 Sturma, D. 335 Sturmey, P. 1093 Suss, D. T. 426–7 Styron, W. 1053n Subirà, M. 438 Sucasas, J. A. 763 Sugimori, E. 1114 Sulmasy, D. P. 1087 Summerfeldt, L. J. 438 Summers, J. A. 1097 Surgenor, L. J. 713, 719 Sutherland, S. 863 Utter, J. 654 Svenaeus, F. 32, 65, 292, Swan, before Christ 627 Synille, E. 915 Synofzik, M. 268, 586, Syszko, J. 1093 Szanto, T. 330 Szasz, T. S. 356, 863, Szilasi, W. 112 Szmukler, G. 859, 863, Wadi, T. 610n 310–11, 313 580, 581, 642 515, 617 214, 931 461 1109, 1112 995–6 864, 867 Taipale, J. 285, 288, 289 Tamara, K. 1081 Talbot, J. A. 572 Taminiaux, J. 347n Tan, J. O. A. 361, 860 Bani, T. 291 Tango, Y. 1114, 1115 Tanofsky-Kraft, M. 531 Tanzi, E. 772, 774, 778 Tao Hongjing 173 Tarabochia, A. S. 165n, 167 Targowla, R. 821 Tarkovsky, A. 878 Tatossian, A. 142, 470, 619, 775 Tavris, C. 666 Taylor 375n Taylor, C. 236, 335, 600 Taylor, M. A. 423, 519, 521, 521n Taylor-Aiken, A. 332 Taylor-Clarke, M. 1113 Teasdale, G. 421 Tellenbach, H. Effective temperaments 806–8, 809 atmospheric diagnosis 876–7 and Blankenburg 159 and Boss 123 clinicians 1013 delusion and mood disorders 754, depression 617, 619 and Kimura 148 melancholy 617, 619, 635 overview 141–7 psychotherapy 967 time 132, 431 types melancholics 143, 144–6, Tengelyi, L. 337 Thakkar, K. N. 1111, 1114, 1115 Thalbitzer, J. 568, 569, 570 Tharoor, H. 589 Theunissen, M. 433, 624 Shier, P. 1112 Thoenes, S. 1113, 1116 Thomas, G. 174 Thomas, J. M. 989n, 993n Thomasson, A. L. 375n Thompson, A. 849, 1110 Thompson, E. 269, 277–8, 328, 927, Thompson, J. K. 534, 714 Taipale, J. 285, 288, 289 Tamara, K. 1081 Talbot, J. A. 572 Taminiaux, J. 347n Tan, J. O. A. 361, 860 Bani, T. 291 Tango, Y. 1114, 1115 Tanofsky-Kraft, M. 531 Tanzi, E. 772, 774, 778 Tao Hongjing 173 Tarabochia, A. S. 165n, 167 Targowla, R. 821 Tarkovsky, A. 878 Tatossian, A. 142, 470, 619, 775 Tavris, C. 666 Taylor 375n Taylor, C. 236, 335, 600 Taylor, M. A. 423, 519, 521, 521n Taylor-Aiken, A. 332 Taylor-Clarke, M. 1113 Teasdale, G. 421 Tellenbach, H. Effective temperaments 806–8, 809 atmospheric diagnosis 876–7 and Blankenburg 159 and Boss 123 clinicians 1013 delusion and mood disorders 754, depression 617, 619 and Kimura 148 melancholy 617, 619, 635 overview 141–7 psychotherapy 967 time 132, 431 types melancholics 143, 144–6, Tengelyi, L. 337 Thakkar, K. N. 1111, 1114, 1115 Thalbitzer, J. 568, 569, 570 Tharoor, H. 589 Theunissen, M. 433, 624 Shier, P. 1112 Thoenes, S. 1113, 1116 Thomas, G. 174 Thomas, J. M. 989n, 993n Thomasson, A. L. 375n Thompson, A. 849, 1110 Thompson, E. 269, 277–8, 328, 927, Thompson, J. K. 534, 714 756, 757, 758, 764 397, 468, 619, 754, 757, 758, 806–7 1069 Thompson, J. R. 1096 Thompson, T. 1053n Thomson, S. R. 718 Thönes, S. 622 Thordarson, D. S. 579 Thornicroft, G. 1035 Thornton-Wells, T. A. 1095 Tiekstra, M. 1095 Tillich, P. 404, 683 Timlett, A. 585 Kitchener, E. B. 249, 251–3 Titelman, P. 132 Todd, J. 486n Todisco, P. 718 Tölle, R. 753 Tomasello, M. 1071, 1075 Tondora, J. 1034 Tononi, G. 417 Tombs, S. K. 377, 377n, Torch, E. M. 572 Torres, E. F. 995, 997, 997 Tosquelles, F. 175 Trail, G. 782 Travis, M. J. 1008 Tregellas, J. R. 847 Trethowan, W. H. 625 Trevarthen, C. 696, 1074 Trig, D. 578 Trillat, É. 649 Troisi, A. 889 Trump, D. 994–5, 991 Krupp, M. 121 Tsakiris, M. 267, 847, Tschacher, W. 434 Tseng, H. H. 1116 Tsiouris, J. A. 1094 Tulloch, A. 859 Turner, J. 863 Austin, F. 813 Tversky, A. 1031 Twinge, J. M. 620 Ucelli di Semi, S.

Uhlhaas, P. J. 484, 489, Elmer, D. K. 462 Ungvari, G. S. 522n, 523, Upthegrove, R. 490, 502, Urban, S. 1046 Urfer, A. 105, 106, 107, Page 56 of 61, 604 1109, 1111 695, 696, 697, 704 496, 845, 849, 1111, 1118 524, 525, 814 796 814, 957 Uslar, D. von 489n Uttal, W. R. 276 Uzieblo, K. 886 Valmaggia, L. 570, 842 van Assche, M. 1116 Van Burn, J. 347n van den Bos, E. 847 van der Heijden, F. M. M. A. 519 van der Mir, L. 847 van der Wile, C. 891 van Dick, T. A. 933 Van Gulick, R. 927 van Os, J. 489, 490n, 601 van Schrojenstein Lantman-De Balk, H. M. J. Van Stamen, C. W. 1073 Van Stamen, W. 973 van Wassenhove, fifth. 1116 Varela, F. J. 254, 262, 269, 277–8 Vargas, S. 625, 813, 876, 1055, Vasterling, fifth. 1074 Velthorst, E. 843 Vendrell Terran, I. 207 Verdonschot, M. M. L. 1092 Verdugo, M. A. 1097 Vermersch, P. 249, 254 Vermetten, E. 566, 573 Viand, S. 757 Aiding, E. 883, 890, 892 Villarreal, E. 955 Sinai, P. 718 Vincent's, G. De 775 Vitacco, M. J. 886 Vowel, L. 904–5 Vogeley, K. 435, 436n Volt, R. 524 Vole, H. 1032 Volpi, F. 347n Von Domarus, E. 814 von Herman, F.-W. 347n Voruganti, L. 829 Vosgerau, G. 586, 1109 Vosgerau, M. 268 Boss, M. 1112, 1113 Vuilleumier, P. 567 Vygotsky, L. S. 452, 818 Wager, T. D. 915 Wagner, E. 135, 136, 776, 779–83 Waits, W. 571 1083, 279, 280, 281, 929, 930, 1069 1056, 785 Wakefield, J. C. 538 Waldenfels, B. 288, 289, 1000 Walker, C. 515 Walter, G. 20 Wang, tenth. J. 1111 Waring, M. 1092 Warlock, M. 184 Watanabe, J. 120 Waterman, M. G. 799 Waters, F. 790, 1115 Watkins, J. 796 Watson, C. G. 572 Watts, G. 1087 Weber, J. 40 Weber, M. 96, 98, 99, 100, 112, 1021, Wefelmeyer, T. 753 Lehman, P. 1092 Wear, T. A. 621 Wehrle, M. 288 Weierstrass, C. 12 Weinberg, G. 559 Weinberger, D. R. 608 Seiner, D. B. 335 Weinstein, E. A. 450, 452, 453 Weiss, E. L. 991 Wei'säOcker, Victor von 43, 102, 143, Wells, A. 578 Melton, D. 255n Werfel, F. 779 Wernicke, C. 493 Hertz, F. J. 351n West, C. 1087 West, E. 749, 879, 1046 Weston, D. 675, 831 Westphal, C. 636, 640 Widaman, K. F. 1096 Widows, M. R. 886 Wiercinski, A. Wieten, S. 192n Wigan, A. L. 568 Wiggins, O. P. 158, 287, 292, 813, 1018, Wijsen, C. 554 Wilkins, J. 1081 Wilkinson, S. 540, 792, 794n Wilkinson-Ryan, T. 831 William of Ockham 325 Williams, D. L. 702 Williams, G. J. 532 Wakefield, J. C. 538 Waldenfels, B. 288, 289, 1000 Walker, C. 515 Walter, G. 20 Wang, tenth. J. 1111 Waring, M. 1092 Warlock, M. 184 Watanabe, J. 120 Waterman, M. G. 799 Waters, F. 790, 1115 Watkins, J. 796 Watson, C. G. 572 Watts, G. 1087 Weber, J. 40 Weber, M. 96, 98, 99, 100, 112, 1021, Wefelmeyer, T. 753 Lehman, P. 1092 Wear, T. A. 621 Wehrle, M. 288 Weierstrass, C. 12 Weinberg, G. 559 Weinberger, D. R. 608 Seiner, D. B. 335 Weinstein, E. A. 450, 452, 453 Weiss, E. L. 991 Wei'säOcker, Victor von 43, 102, 143, Wells, A. 578 Melton, D. 255n Werfel, F. 779 Wernicke, C. 493 Hertz, F. J. 351n West, C. 1087 West, E. 749, 879, 1046 Weston, D. 675, 831 Westphal, C. 636, 640 Widaman, K. F. 1096 Widows, M. R. 886 Wiercinski, A. Wieten, S. 192n Wigan, A. L. 568 Wiggins, O. P. 158, 287, 292, 813, 1018, Wijsen, C. 554 Wilkins, J. 1081 Wilkinson, S. 540, 792, 794n Wilkinson-Ryan, T. 831 William of Ockham 325 Williams, D. L. 702 Williams, G. J. 532 1022n, 1045 148, 489, 489n, 491, 494, 497–8, 684 1020, 1021–2, 1023, 1024, 1032 Williams, R. N. 84n Williamson, D. A. 531 Wilmanns, K. 97 Wilson, D. A. 917 Wilson, N. J. 1092 Wilson, P. 560 Dimmer, A. 139 Windelband, W. 98 Wing, J. K. 354, 728 Wing, L. 698, 1080, Winnicott, D. W. 115, Winokur, G. 753 Winter, S. J. 553, 560, Wither-Lindqvist, D. A. Hinton-Brown, T. 610n, Wiseman, C. fifth. 718 Wishart, J. G. 1087 Wisniewski, A. A. 519, Wisniewski, A. B. 554 Witczak, J. 914 Wittgenstein, L. 16, 121, Witztum, E. 485n Wolfe, B. E. 531, 533 Wolfersdorf, M. 753, Wolpert, D. M. 587, Woodberry, K. A. 841 Woodruff Smith, D. 375n Woods, A. 500, 503, Woolf, fifth. 879 Wrathall, M. A. 184, Wriedt, E. 1081 Wright, G. von 293 Roe, A. L. 580 Wu, W. 797 Wundt, W. M. 21, 252 Wylie, K. P. 847 Waller, T. 244 Wellie, M. 433 Wyrsch, J. 932 Wuss, D. 498 Yale, S. A. 864 Yalow, I. D. 404 Yap, P. M. 753, 755 Yasuda, A. 587 Yeats, W. B. 820 Yonkers, K. A. 479 Young, A. 427–8 Young, I. M. 211 1081 833, 897 561, 562 192n 849 368, 816, 934, 1068 754–6, 757 1112 1055 460n Bung, A. R. 841, 842, 844, 1110 Zachary, P. 307 Zahavi, D. alterity 381 autism 698, 700 autobiography 1054n, 1057, 1057n, cognitive sciences 262, 263, 265, conscience 398 EASE 17 embodiment 327 essential types 1022–3 and Heidegger 120 introspection 248, 249, 250, 254, law 860 minimal self 793 neurophenomenology 279n, 280 neuroscience 909, 910 normality 287, 292 obsessive-compulsive disorder personhood 336, 337, 338 phenomenological psychopathology phenomenology 191, 236, 237, psychiatric ethics 973 psychopathy 882, 891 psychosis 848 quantitative research 945n, 946 schizophrenia 149 schizophrenic autism 814, 816, self 242, 299, 302, 303, 466, 467 simulation theory 18 temporality 432 Zahorik, P. 847 Zaitsoff, S. L. 533 Zanarini, M. C. 827, 828 Zandersen, M. 944 Zangwill, O. L. 426 Zaudig, M. 640 Zaveri, P. 566 Zeke, S. 427 Zempel, J. M. 1117 Zerssen, D. von 619, 757 Hang, K. C. 1087 Hang Xichun 173 Zhu, tenth. 914, 915 Zic, A. 1092 Zilkha, N. 835 Zimprich, F. 566 schizophrenia 149 schizophrenic autism 814, 816, self 242, 299, 302, 303, 466, 467 simulation theory 18 temporality 432 Zahorik, P. 847 Zaitsoff, S. L. 533 Zanarini, M. C. 827, 828 Zandersen, M. 944 Zangwill, O. L. 426 Zaudig, M. 640 Zaveri, P. 566 Zeke, S. 427 Zempel, J. M. 1117 Zerssen, D. von 619, 757 Hang, K. C. 1087 Hang Xichun 173 Zhu, tenth. 914, 915 Zic, A. 1092 Zilkha, N. 835 Zimprich, F. 566 1058 266 255, 259 1073 192 248, 927, 928, 929, 930, 931, 934 817, 822 Zisook, S. 538, 538n, Zubiri, tenth. 477, 479 Fucker, K. J. 555, Butt, J. 159, 659, Zwaigenbaum, L.

539, 540n, 832 556, 559 692 704 # Subject Index The Oxford Handbook of Phenomenological Psychopathology Polo Fusar-Poi, and René Rosfort Print Publication Date: Jul 2019 Subject: # Subject Index abnormal bodily phenomena (ABP) 844, 849–50 Abnormal Bodily Phenomena questionnaire (ABPq) abnormality 285, 288–90 Beauvoir clinical phenomenology 218 Anon 176, 177 Foucault 90 genetic phenomenology 228–32 Heidegger 43 Husserl 16, 43, 226, 285, 288–9, 291, 293 Jasper 96 Merleau-Monty 48 abnormal salience hypothesis 845, 846 absorption and vigilance, distinction between acceleration (Rosa) 146 Adaptive Behavior Assessment System (ABAS second) addictive disorders 682–94 conscience 398, 400 psychiatric ethics 983 adolescents, with intellectual disability 1091 anesthesiology of the senses (Straps) 128–9 Effective climate 932 Effective Contact Deficit Hypothesis, autism Effective disorders see mood disorders Effective intentionality 327, 330–1, 332 Effective psychopathology 919 Effective psychosis 841–2, 845 Effective resonance 655 Effective situatedness see Befindlichkeit Effective temperaments 803–11 affectivity 459–64 in autism 703–4 Page 1 of 53 Edited by Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Brooke, Andrea Raballo, Anthony Vincent Fernandez, Philosophy Online Publication Date: Mar 2018 842, 849 443 1096 699, 705 affects and moods, distinction between 666, intentionality 745 agency in schizophrenia 1112–14, 1115–17 in subclinical schizotypy 1115 agoraphobia 578 aïda 152–3, 154–5, 875 kinetic Autism 424 akoasms 494, 500, 502 alcohol intoxication 423 alexithymia 533 alloaesthesia 516 Alton (Straps) 129, 130–1 alter ego 882, 887–8, 889 alterity 381–8 anger 674–5 depressive delusions 763–4 dialectic understanding 958 dysphoria 672–3 eating disorders 716–17 hallucinations 502 obsessive-compulsive conditions 644 phenomenological psychotherapy 963 psychiatric ethics 979–81, 982, 983, Alzheimer’s disease 448, 510 ambiguity Merleau-Monty 45–7, 48 Ricoeur 76 American Association for Intellectual and Developmental Disorders American Psychiatric Association (American Psychiatric Association) amnesia dissociative 570–1, 572 generalized 571 selective 571 transient global 448 anarthria 450, 451 anger, borderline personality disorder Angst 900–1 anguish and anxiety, distinction between 475, Freud 476 Generalized Anxiety Disorder 480 anhedonia 763 anomalous self-experiences see anorexia nervosa (anorexia nervosa) 529, 532, 533, attention and concentration impairment autobiography 1053 984 1079 991, 994 665, 666, 667, 673–5, 829, 831–2, 835 476–7, 481 self-disorders 710 447 bodily psychopathology 510, 512 embodiment 372 IDEA questionnaire 713 identity 712 language of body and eating 718 phenomenological psychotherapy 966, 967 values 357–60, 361 anosodiaphoria 426 anosognosia 514 awareness impairment 426, 427 psychological accounts 513 antagonomia 361, 965, 967 anthropological fragmentation, hysterical 658 anthropological psychiatry 102 Blankenburg 158, 159–60, 162, 163 Straps 126, 127, 132 anthropology Levinas 84 philosophical 174, 175, 178, 308 Schemer 60 anthropophenomenology 769–70 anti-dehumanization 174–5 anti-psychiatry 872 America’s social life-world 995–6, 997 diagnostic process 1010 Foucault 91 antisocial personality disorder conscience 400 psychopathy 883, 885, 886–7 Anton’s syndrome 418 anxiety 475–83 Effective regulation difficulty 533 attacks 480, 481 autism 700 autonomy 379 Befindlichkeit 349–51 bodily psychopathology 510, 512 catatonia 524 cognitive science 263 conscience 398, 402, 404 conversion disorder 566, 572, 573 delusional mood 743, 746 depressive delusions 756 dissociation 566, 568, 569 eating disorders 532, 718, 720 embodiment 372 emotion 313 existential 902 bodily psychopathology 510, 512 embodiment 372 IDEA questionnaire 713 identity 712 language of body and eating 718 phenomenological psychotherapy 966, 967 values 357–60, 361 anosodiaphoria 426 anosognosia 514 awareness impairment 426, 427 psychological accounts 513 antagonomia 361, 965, 967 anthropological fragmentation, hysterical 658 anthropological psychiatry 102 Blankenburg 158, 159–60, 162, 163 Straps 126, 127, 132 anthropology Levinas 84 philosophical 174, 175, 178, 308 Schemer 60 anthropophenomenology 769–70 anti-dehumanization 174–5 anti-psychiatry 872 America’s social life-world 995–6, 997 diagnostic process 1010 Foucault 91 antisocial personality disorder conscience 400 psychopathy 883, 885, 886–7 Anton’s syndrome 418 anxiety 475–83 Effective regulation difficulty 533 attacks 480, 481 autism 700 autonomy 379 Befindlichkeit 349–51 bodily psychopathology 510, 512 catatonia 524 cognitive science 263 conscience 398, 402, 404 conversion disorder 566, 572, 573 delusional mood 743, 746 depressive delusions 756 dissociation 566, 568, 569 eating disorders 532, 718, 720 embodiment 372 emotion 313 existential 902 and fear, distinction between 478, 901 generalized anxiety disorder 424, 446, 480 hysteria 566 Minkowski 108 moods 460 neurodevelopmental disorders 1085 normal 479–80 obsessive-compulsive conditions 577, 581, paranoia 776, 784 pathological 479–80 phenomenological approach 212, 213 phobias 578, 582 psychosis risk 843, 845 psychotic 932 schizophrenia 601 social 529 somatization disorder 566, 572, 573 vital 477–81 aphasia 450–5 linguistic analysis 452–3 mitigated echolalia 523 phenomenological psychopathology 454–5 apophany stage, schizophrenia 730 arch-aïda 154, 155 Asperger’s syndrome 993, 1080 Association for Methodology and Documentation in Psychiatry (AMDP) atmospheres 872–81, 1013 attention 442–4, 449 vs. consciousness 417 defined 442 disorders 424–6, 428, 445–7, 448–9 attenuated psychotic symptoms (APS) 841, attunement see Befindlichkeit auditory–verbal hallucinations (AVHs) defined 789–90 phenomenology 932 schizophrenia 792–3, 794, 796–8 self-disorder 792–6, 797–8, 799 and thought insertion, relationship between auras 875 authenticity and anger 832 autobiographies 1055, 1056, 1058 existentialism 184 hermeneutical phenomenology 239 autism 1080–1, 1082–3, 1098 adaptive behavior 1096 Effective intentionality 331 636, 637, 640 754 842–8 489–503, 729, 789–802 590–2 see also verbal-acoustic hallucinations alterity 385 America’s social life-world 998 attention and concentration impairment Binswanger 115 Bleuler 812–14 bodily psychopathology 514 conscience 403 delayed echolalia 523 DSM 993 emotional and spiritual life 1087–8 empathy research 18 fantasy vs. realism 817–19 Freud 115 life-world 695–709 Minkowski 106–7, 109 normality 292 practical experience 1088 psychosis risk 843 quality of life 1097 schizophrenic 696, 697–8, 733, 736, 737, self-experience 1084 selfhood 470 social experience 1091, 1092 unitary intelligence 1094, 1095 withdrawal, psychodynamics of 820–2 autistic-solipsistic delusions 730 autobiography 1053–64 depression 1057–9 recovery process 1059–61 use of 1054–6 auto-echolalia (palilalia) 521n, 523 autoerotism 813, 818 autonomy 374–80 law 859, 860 personhood 340, 341 psychiatric ethics 972, 975–7, 979–83 Ricoeur autopagnosia 514 autoscopic echopraxia 496 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder awareness and attention, distinction between 443 disorders 426–8 Basel Screening Instrument for Psychosis (BSIP) basic symptoms (BS) 425, 839, 840–1, Befindlichkeit 194–5, 198, 199–202, 239, affectivity 459–61 drug addiction 693 738–41, 812–26, 937, 945, 1080, 1081 529 842 842–8 344–53 Heidegger 307 behaviorism 127 Being 389–90 being-in-the-world 213, 220, 307, 310, 372, 394 attention and concentration 443 autism 815, 822 Basaglia 167 Beauvoir 55 Binswanger 115, 192, 888 Boss 119, 120, 121–2, 123 clinicians, formation of 1012 depression 764 drug addictions 684, 687–8, 691 eating disorders 534, 716, 717, 720 Gadamer 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 461n genetic phenomenology 233 Heidegger 28, 119, 120, 121–2, 194, 196, 200, 393, 459, 901 Husserl 16, 762 hysteria 660 Ling 183, 185, 186, 187 Levinas manic 888 Merleau-Monty 329, 369, 720, 928 neurodiversity 1084, 1085, 1098 neurophenomenology 1071–4, 1075 psychopathy 882, 883, 887–8, 889, 892 psychosis 501, 846, 849 psychotherapy 956, 962 Sartre 369 Straps 131 Tellenbach 806 trauma 900, 901 vital anxiety 478, 481 being-with-others 461–2 belle indifference 572 Bellevue Sanatorium, Kreuzlingen 111–12, 116 bereavement see grief Bewegungssturm 477 binge eating/binge eating disorder (binge eating disorder) 529, IDEA questionnaire 713, 714 language of body and eating 718 biological psychiatry 158, 910, 911, 912, 913, 919 bipolar disorder Effective temperaments 804 attention impairment 424 auditory–verbal hallucinations 796 neurophenomenology 1071–4, 1075 psychopathy 882, 883, 887–8, 889, 892 psychosis 501, 846, 849 psychotherapy 956, 962 Sartre 369 Straps 131 Tellenbach 806 trauma 900, 901 vital anxiety 478, 481 being-with-others 461–2 belle indifference 572 Bellevue Sanatorium, Kreuzlingen 111–12, 116 bereavement see grief Bewegungssturm 477 binge eating/binge eating disorder (binge eating disorder) 529, IDEA questionnaire 713, 714 language of body and eating 718 biological psychiatry 158, 910, 911, 912, 913, 919 bipolar disorder Effective temperaments 804 attention impairment 424 auditory–verbal hallucinations 796 207, 210, 219, 239, 274, 308, 345–9, 351, 369, 370, 530–4, 535, 710 High-Risk states for psychosis 839, 841 Kretschmer 135, 137 Minkowski 105 neuroscience 915 and schizophrenia, comparison between subject–object correlation 287 time 628 Bipolar Prodrome Symptom Interview and Scale–Prospective (BPSS-P) blindsight 418, 427–8 bodily psychopathology 509–18 descriptive 511–12 incidence 510 neuropsychological accounts 513–14 nosological specificity 512 phenomenology 514–15 philosophical phenomenology 515–16 psychological accounts 512–13 range of 509–10 bodily self in schizophrenia 1109–23 body abnormal bodily phenomena 844, anger 673–4 as blowhole 832–4 checking 532 depressive delusions 762, 763, 764 drug addiction 687 dysphoria 671–2 eating disorders 711–20 ownership, in schizophrenia 1110–12 and the self 1109–10 see also corporeality; body dysmorphic disorder 529, 534 body image disturbance 529–30, 531, body shape concern 534–5 Bonn Scale for the Assessment of Basic Symptoms (BSABS) borderline intellectual functioning (BIF) borderline personality disorder (borderline personality disorder) Effective regulation difficulty 533 auditory–verbal hallucinations 796 autobiography 1053 dysphoria 827–38 life-world 665–81 psychopathy 883 boredom 617–18 borderline personality disorder 667–8 dissociation 570 dysphoria 669, 670, 671 time 435 brain trauma 737, 740 841 849–50 embodiment 534–5 bodily psychopathology 510 decision-making capacity 863, twilight state 423 Briquet’s Syndrome 573 bulimia nervosa (bulimia nervosa) 529, 531–2 IDEA questionnaire 713 burn-out syndrome 620 Bush-Francis Catatonia Rating Scale bystander role, borderline persons Capgras delusion 587 care and caring 977–9 catatonia 519–28 psychopathological definition recognition and diagnosis 522–4 stupor 424 subjective experiences and patients’ inner world categories 193–4, 195, causality Binswanger 112–13 and intentionality 326 Stein 21–2, 23 understanding and explaining central executive network (CEN) charity 867 children, with intellectual disability classical psychoanalysis 38–9 classification see psychiatric classification clinical decision making 1031–41 clinical encounters 1035–8 competing forces 1033–5 phenomenological approach 1032 clinical phenomenology 216–24 clinical psychopathology 420 clinicians, formation of 1004–15 phenomenological psychopathology, reasons for teaching phenomenology 1061 physical vs. mental health care psychopathology’s agenda 1009–13 teacher’s personal influence trainees’ unmet needs 1005–7 clouded consciousness 421, 523 coercion 862 cognition cognitive psychopathology 919 cognitive sandwich model of 1067, cognitive sciences 262–72 cognitive theory 267–9 hallucinations 501–2 865–6, 533, 710 523 677–8 521–2 524 197 408–9, 412 915 1091, 1092 1008–9 1035 1013–14 Husserl 17–18, 1069 neuroscience 263, 264, 268, 269, 275, Cognitive Assessment System (CAS) Cognitive Disturbances scale (COGDIS) colonialism 174–5, 176, 177, 178, 179–80 coma 421 common sense auditory–verbal hallucinations 799–800 Blankenburg 105, 160, 816 Husserl 17–18 lack of 385 Straps 128, 131 co-morbidity 872 completion phenomenon 523 complexity 769–70 complicated grief 548 Comprehensive Assessment of At-Risk Mental State (CAARMS) Comprehensive Assessment of Psychopathic Personality (CAPP) Donation depression 621, 622, 623, 626 implicit temporality 432 mania 626–7 phenomenological psychotherapy 964–5 time 617 conatus 237n concentration 442–4, 449 defined 442 disorder 445–7, 448–9 concordance genetic phenomenology 229, 230, 231 normality 284, 289–91 confabulation 447–8 conflict 401 conscience 397–406 consciousness 316–23, 410, 417–30 attention 443–4 attention disorders 424–6 awareness disorders 426–8 Bergson 91–2 Boss 122 clouding of 421, 523 cognitive science 268 concentration 443–4 and conscience 397–9, 400, 404 Deleuze 91–2 depressive delusions 761, 762 dimensional changes 420–1 discovery of 1043–4 276, 277, 281, 424, 425, 524, 1070–1 1095 842, 849 887, 889 disorders 420–8 embodiment 369 Husserl 91–2 hysterical 652 intentionality 326, 327–8, introspection 250, 252, Jasper 122 Merleau-Monty 149 Minkowski 105 neurophenomenology 280 neuroscience 910, 921 paranoia 777 phenomenal 484–508 phenomenology 770, 927–8 psychoanalysis 1043–6 qualitative changes 421–4 Sartre 36, 39–40 self 300–1, 302, 303 as surface 1044–6 twilight state of 688 consensual qualitative research (CQR) consent, valid 859, 861–2, constitutional typology (Kretschmer) control delusions of 264, 266, 267–8 eating disorders 532–3 conversation 63, 64, 66–7, conversion 566, 572–3 disorder 522n, 650 corporeality anxiety 480 Blankenburg 160 hysteria 659–60 values 358–9 see also body; Dotard’s syndrome affectivity 461 depressive delusions 755, neuroscience 1072 selfhood 470 time 625 creativity 162–3 criminalization 996–9 critical theory 158 cyclothymia (Kretschmer) cyclothymic temperament (Kraepelin) Casein anxiety 476 Page 10 of 53 330, 331, 1067, 1068, 1075 253–4, 255–6, 942 935 868 135, 136–8 69 embodiment 756, 759–64 805–6, 809 804, 811 Binswanger 106, 114 boredom 668 Boss 121, 122, 123 drug addiction 684, 691, 692 Heidegger 25, 28, 30, 82, 83, 106, 120, 157, 193, 460n schizophrenia 736, 739 self 300 Casein-group analysis, drug addiction 692–3 Daseinsanalysis Binswanger 25, 29–30, 31, 32n, 119 Blankenburg 157, 158, 159, 160 Boss 26, 32, 115, 119 Condrau 115 Heidegger 31 Jasper 102 death motif, in obsessive-compulsive conditions decision making capacity (DMC) 861–9 clinical see clinical decision making default mode network (DMN) depression 915 psychosis risk 847, 848 schizophrenia 608–9 Defective Cognitive and Effective Integration Theories, autism degeneration theory (Morel) 136 dehumanization Anon 174–5 psychiatric ethics 982–3 déjà vu 280 delayed echolalia 523 delirium 421–3, 428 attention impairment 424, 426, 446 memory impairment 448 thought, speech, and language disorders 452 delusional disorder 770–1 delusional mood 743–52 delusions 503 alterity 385, 386 anxiety 476 atmospheres 877 autistic-solipsistic 730 Blankenburg 159 bodily psychopathology 511–12, 516 catatonia 525 of control 264, 266, 267–8 decision-making capacity 864, 867 211, 212, 216–17 n, 220n, 274, 300, 316, 344–51, 642–3, 644–5, 646 699 delusional disorder 770–1 delusional mood 743–52 depression 624–5 dopamine 411–12 embodiment 371 empathic understanding 955 and hallucinations, distinction between holothymic 755 Jasper 135, 136, 138 Kretschmer 135, 136, 139 melancholic 624–5, 628 vs. memory disorders 447 mood 311 mood disorders 753–68 neuroscience 918, 921, 922 nihilistic 516, 625, 760, 763 paranoid 770–85 paraphrenic 773–4 psychoanalysis 1046 querulous 770, 773n, 775, 779, schizophrenia 599, 729–30, 731, schizophrenic autism 814, 817, Schneider 136, 138 sensitive delusion of reference thought insertion 585–6, 587–90 time 436 understanding 410–12 values 354–7, 360 dementia aphasia 452 attention impairment 424 bodily psychopathology 510 with Dewy bodies 448 memory impairment 447, 448, praecox see schizophrenia dependent personality 967 depersonalization 568–70, 571, agoraphobia 578 anomalous self-experience research cognitive science 264 depression 623 disorder see depersonalization disorder drug addiction 688 dysphoria 671 obsessive-compulsive conditions panic disorder 606 phenomenological psychopathology psychosis 843, 844–6, 848 783–5 733, 736–42, 753, 764, 918, 922 822, 823 134–6, 138, 592 572, 601 604–5, 607 638, 639 943 selfhood 471 depersonalization disorder 601 anomalous self-experience research 604–5 introspection 253 depression agoraphobia 578 anti-psychiatry 996 anxiety 476, 480 appetite loss 530 attention and concentration impairment 424, 445–6 autobiography 1053, 1057–9, 1060 Befindlichkeit 350 Blankenburg 163 bodily psychopathology 512, 514–15 body image disturbance 529, 534 borderline personality disorder 678 chronic 625–6 cognitive science 263 conscience 397–8 conversion disorder 572, 573 decision-making capacity 864, 867–8 delusions 743, 753–65 desynchronization 200–1 n dissociation 568, 569, 570 and drug addiction, comparison between 690 DSM 538, 541, 625, 992, 1067–8 embodiment 371 and grief, distinction between 538–49 Heidegger 32 High-Risk states for psychosis 839, 840, 845 intentionality 332 memory impairment 449 moods 460 neurodevelopmental disorders 1085 neuroscience 911, 914–15, 919, 1072–3, 1074 normality 292 phenomenological psychotherapy 963–4, 967 phenomenology 618–20 psychiatric classification 1017 psychopathology 621–6 psychosis risk 843 psychotic 510, 603–4, 796 resynchronization therapy 629 rumination 919, 947 somatization disorder 572, 573 Straps 132 stupor 424 selfhood 471 depersonalization disorder 601 anomalous self-experience research 604–5 introspection 253 depression agoraphobia 578 anti-psychiatry 996 anxiety 476, 480 appetite loss 530 attention and concentration impairment 424, 445–6 autobiography 1053, 1057–9, 1060 Befindlichkeit 350 Blankenburg 163 bodily psychopathology 512, 514–15 body image disturbance 529, 534 borderline personality disorder 678 chronic 625–6 cognitive science 263 conscience 397–8 conversion disorder 572, 573 decision-making capacity 864, 867–8 delusions 743, 753–65 desynchronization 200–1 n dissociation 568, 569, 570 and drug addiction, comparison between 690 DSM 538, 541, 625, 992, 1067–8 embodiment 371 and grief, distinction between 538–49 Heidegger 32 High-Risk states for psychosis 839, 840, 845 intentionality 332 memory impairment 449 moods 460 neurodevelopmental disorders 1085 neuroscience 911, 914–15, 919, 1072–3, 1074 normality 292 phenomenological psychotherapy 963–4, 967 phenomenology 618–20 psychiatric classification 1017 psychopathology 621–6 psychosis risk 843 psychotic 510, 603–4, 796 resynchronization therapy 629 rumination 919, 947 somatization disorder 572, 573 Straps 132 stupor 424 subject–object correlation 286–7 Tellenbach 142, 145–6 temperament 804, 811 temporality 1026–7 thought, speech, and language disorders time 132, 431, 432, 435, 437, values 355 depressive psychosis 510, 603–4 depressive temperament 804, derailment 451 derealization 569, 571, 572 depression 625 drug addiction 688 intrusive 730 panic disorder 606 psychosis 843, 844–6, 848 schizophrenia 745 descriptive phenomenology emotion 308–9, 312 descriptive psychology 376 descriptive psychopathology desynchronization 434–5, 439, depression 200–1 n, 437, 619–23 grief 200–1 n mania 628 melancholia 468, 470 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders America’s social life-world 990, anorexia nervosa 357, 358, 359 auditory–verbal hallucinations autism 698, 813n, 1081 borderline personality disorder catatonia 522, 523, 525 clinical decision making 1033 clinicians, formation of 1008, conversion disorder 522n, 573 delusional disorder 770–1 delusional mood 743 delusions 511 depersonalization 568 depression 538, 541, 625, 992, depressive delusions 754, 755 dissociation 569, 573 dissociative amnesia 571 eating disorders 529, 535, 710 gender dysphoria 552, 553, 554 generalized anxiety disorder grief 538–9, 541 452 439, 618–26, 628, 796 811 216–23, 226 919 462, 618, 624, 628 (DSM) 991–3, 994–5 790 828 1067–8 homosexuality 559 and Husserl 13 hysteria 650 intellectual disability 1096 intelligence 1094 narcissistic personality disorder 994–5 neurodevelopmental perspective 1082 neuroscience 1075 obsessive-compulsive conditions 636 operational psychiatry 944 paranoia 770–1 personality disorders 471 Praecox Gefühl 876 psychiatric classification 1016, 1017, 1018, psychopathy 883, 884 schizophrenia 355, 361, 698, 727, 729, 731, 732, somatization disorder 573 values 355, 357, 358, 359, 361 Diagnostic Interview Schedule (DIS) 757 diagnostic manuals see Classification of Diseases dialectics Blankenburg 159, 160 Anon 178 dialectic understanding 953, 957–8 dieting 530 diktat experiences 932 disability, awareness of 865–6 discordance (genetic phenomenology) 229, 230, disorders of sex development (DSD) 555 disposition see Befindlichkeit dissocial personality disorder 384 dissociation 566, 568–72, 573 borderline personality disorder 677 disorders see dissociative disorders trauma 902–3 dissociative amnesia 570–1, 572 dissociative disorders dissociative identity disorder 571 selfhood 470–1 twilight state 423 disturbed cognitive/perceptual grip (schizophrenia) dopamine 411–12 dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), and eating disorders Down syndrome 1087, 1094, 1096 dreams Boss 122 Freud 122 1019, 1020 733 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; International 599, 600, 605, 609, 610–11 716 Heidegger 122 loss of dreaming 451, 452 dressing apraxia 513 drowsiness 421 drug addiction 682–94 DSM see Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders dualism autonomy 375 embodiment 367–8, 369, 371 duty 975–8 dysmorphophobia 515–16 dysphoria background 829, 830 borderline personality disorder 665, 666–7, 668, pathways 828–30 psychosis risk 843 regulating 833 situational 830–2 Early Heidelberg School 484, 487–91, 494–5, (ERIraos) 842 EASE (Examination of Anomalous Self Experiences) auditory–verbal hallucinations 794 depersonalization 604–5 dimensional analysis 1025n dissociation 569, 570 introspectionism 604–5 normality 292 panic disorder 605–6 psychosis risk 842, 849 schizophrenia 17, 598, 602–5, 607, 611–12, eating behavior and disorders 529–37 addiction 682 as embodiment and identity disorders 710–23 normality 292 psychiatric ethics 983 psychopathology 710–11, 715 values 361 see also anorexia nervosa; EAWE (Examination of Anomalous World Experiences) echo contamination 523 echolalia 450, 451 catatonia 521n, 523 echopraxia 523 education see clinicians, formation of ego autism 739 Binswanger 116 depressive delusions 762–3 Page 16 of 53 669–73, 827–38 497–503 Early Recognition Inventory for the Retrospective Assessment of the Onset of Schizophrenia 945–8 945–7, 948 binge eating/binge eating disorder; bulimia nervosa 612, 849, 948 mania 882, 887–8, 889 paranoia 771, 772, 782, 785–6 psychopathy 882, 887–8, 889 Sartre 36 schizophrenia 739 schizophrenic autism 822 self 301, 302, 303 unconscious 316, 317, 321, 322, 323 eidetic reduction 251, 257–9, 278 eidetic understanding 953, 956–7 eidetic variation 376 Lidos 13, 274 élan vital 143 Bergson 106, 151 Minkowski 106 elation 618 elderly, pathologizing of 53–5 embodiment 367–73, 930 affectivity 461 alterity 382–3 autonomy 377 Beauvoir 53 eating disorders 534, 535 hallucinations 487–8 hysteria 657 intentionality 327, 329 Kimura 149 neuroscience 276 personhood 339 phenomenological approach 210, 211 self 302–3 see also body; corporeality emotional dwelling 904 emotional eating 533–4 emotion-focused therapy 1060 emotions 306–15, 1069 atmospheres 873–4 autism 703, 704 autobiography 1058, 1059–61 Befindlichkeit 351 borderline personality disorder 665, 666–9, 828–9 classical psychoanalysis 38–9 depression 622–3 eating disorders 530, 712, 713, 717–18 intentionality 745 and moods, distinction between 195n, 460 neurodevelopmental disorders 1087 Peripheric theory 38 phenomenological approach 212–13 mania 882, 887–8, 889 paranoia 771, 772, 782, 785–6 psychopathy 882, 887–8, 889 Sartre 36 schizophrenia 739 schizophrenic autism 822 self 301, 302, 303 unconscious 316, 317, 321, 322, 323 eidetic reduction 251, 257–9, 278 eidetic understanding 953, 956–7 eidetic variation 376 Lidos 13, 274 élan vital 143 Bergson 106, 151 Minkowski 106 elation 618 elderly, pathologizing of 53–5 embodiment 367–73, 930 affectivity 461 alterity 382–3 autonomy 377 Beauvoir 53 eating disorders 534, 535 hallucinations 487–8 hysteria 657 intentionality 327, 329 Kimura 149 neuroscience 276 personhood 339 phenomenological approach 210, 211 self 302–3 see also body; corporeality emotional dwelling 904 emotional eating 533–4 emotion-focused therapy 1060 emotions 306–15, 1069 atmospheres 873–4 autism 703, 704 autobiography 1058, 1059–61 Befindlichkeit 351 borderline personality disorder 665, 666–9, 828–9 classical psychoanalysis 38–9 depression 622–3 eating disorders 530, 712, 713, 717–18 intentionality 745 and moods, distinction between 195n, 460 neurodevelopmental disorders 1087 Peripheric theory 38 phenomenological approach 212–13 psychopathy 882, 890–1, 892 reductive naturalism 37–8 regulation 1059–61 Sartre 37–9 Schemer 58–9 and temperaments, distinction between time 618 trauma 896–906 empathic understanding 953, empathy Effective intentionality 330 atmospheres 879 Befindlichkeit 350 clinicians, formation of 1011–12 Dilthey 100 firsthand second-order 1011–12 Husserl Jasper 100 mania 888–9 psychopathy 882, 891–2 empiricism 12, 158, 266–7 emptiness (borderline personality disorder) Inactive Mind from Actions to Cognition model, autism endogeneity (Tellenbach) 142–3 Tendon 142–3 epilepsy bodily psychopathology 510 dissociation 571, 572 hallucinations 486n neurophenomenology 280 twilight state 423 epoché 274 clinical phenomenology 221 drug addiction 691, 693 genetic phenomenology 225 Husserl introspection 249–50, 251, 253, phenomenological approach phenomenological psychotherapy thought insertion 588, 593 unconscious 322 essentialism 941–2 essential types 1020, 1022–3 ethics America’s social life-world 994, autonomy 376 Anon 179 of finitude 904–5 808 954–6 830–1 699 254, 256, 258 209, 210, 212, 213 953–4, 959 Levinas 80, 81–6 neurodevelopmental disorders personhood 337–8 psychiatric see psychiatric ethics Ricoeur 74 see also morality euphoria mania 627 time 618 evolution 1066 exemplars 1024n existential feelings 195, 195n, grief 548–9 n time 617–18 existentialism anxiety 476, 481 Beauvoir 53 emotion 307–8, 313 Ling 182, 183–6, 188 Merleau-Monty 47–8 phenomenology 212–13, 274 trauma 900–2 existential phenomenology existential psychiatry 183, 185 existential psychoanalysis 39–41 existential 192–9, 202–3 experience emotion 309–10 hermeneutical phenomenology normality 284, 286, 288, 293 perceptual articulation of, in autism personhood 336–7 self 300, 301, 302 explaining clinicians, formation of 1010–11 and understanding, distinction between explicationists 254–5, 257 extracampine hallucinations fatigue 523 fear and anxiety, distinction between Befindlichkeit 349 Heidegger 195 obsessions 579, 580 phobias 577 feelings 309–11, 312, 477 borderline personality disorder existential see existential feelings Page 19 of 53 Executive Dysfunction Hypothesis, autism 699, 705 197–8, 199, 201, 202, 461–2 186–7 238–9, 241–2, 243 701–2 407–9, 412 731 478, 901 678–9 intentionality 327 phenomenological approach types 477–8 fictional approaches to mental illness field observations 925 finger agnosia 514 finitude ethics of 904–5 trauma 902–5 first-person accounts auditory–verbal hallucinations autobiography 1053–64 autonomy 377 cognitive science 263–6 consciousness 928 depression and grief, similarities between existential feelings 461 neurophenomenology 277, 279, phenomenology 942 thought insertion 585, 586–7 flight of ideas 451, 452 focus groups 925 food restriction 530 formal thought disorder 450–4 fragile understanding 878–9 Fragile tenth syndrome 1096 fragility, strength of 981–4 freedom Blankenburg 158, 161, 162 existentialism 184 Ey 161 Jasper 101 phenomenological approach Ricoeur Sartre 376–7 free variation 956, 1054n frontal brain injury, and decision-making capacity fugue 570, 571 twilight state 423 gender disorder of 553–4 phenomenological approach role 555–6, 560 terms relating to 557–8 gender dysphoria 552–65 body image disturbance 529, DSM 993 gender identity 552, 553, 554–5 212–13 987n 796, 798 539–40 381 212, 213 863, 865–6 211 534, 559, 61 disorder 993 generalized amnesia 571 generalized anxiety disorder 424, generative disorder see trouble géné generative phenomenology 225, genetic phenomenology 225–34 clinical phenomenology 221 hallucinations 502 genetic psychology 376 genetic understanding 635 obsessive-compulsive conditions psychotherapy 955, 961 geographical space 129–30 Gestalt Husserl 12 phenomenological psychopathology psychiatric classification 1023, global workplace theory 417 Gnosticism 187 Gnostic sensing (Straps) 128, 129, good life, and psychiatric ethics Gorizia asylum 166–70 grandiosity 771, 772, 774, 779–84 grief 538–51 Befindlichkeit 350 modal alterations 198–203 time 435 Grounded Theory 926 guilt conscience 402, 404 delusion and mood disorders 625, delusional mood 749 paranoia 775 time 435 hallucinations 484–508 alterity 385–6 catatonia 525 decision-making capacity 864 and delusions, distinction between extracampine 731 genetic phenomenology 228 hypervigilance 797 neuroscience 916, 918, 921, 922, schizophrenia 733, 916, 918, 922 twilight state 423 verbal-acoustic 729, 731–2 see also hallucinatory echolalia 523 hallucinosis 486 446, 480 rater 232 639–42, 645–6 944 1024, 1027 130–1 974–7, 980 753–4, 755, 756, 757, 760 1072, 1073 auditory–verbal hallucinations Hare Psychopathy Checklist—Revised (PCL-R) healing atmospheres 877 health existential feeling of 461 Gadamer 65–7, 71 Levinas 86 theory of (Heidegger) 31–2 hebephrenia 737 hemiasomatognosia 513, 514 hemiparesis defective appreciation of, with rationalization denial of 426, 427 lack of concern about 426 unawareness of see anosognosia hermeneutical phenomenology 211–12, emotion 313 Gadamer 68 personhood 337, 338 Ricoeur 73–5, 77 hermeneutics 635 Blankenburg 159 cognitive science 266 complex perspective 770 Gadamer 63–71, 212 Heidegger 211, 256 injustice 989, 992, 993, 996 introspection 256, 257, 258, 259 Merleau-Monty 257 modal alterations 198 neurophenomenology 281 obsessive-compulsive conditions 642–5, phenomenological psychotherapy 962–3 Ricoeur 72, 73–5, 77 see also heteronomic vulnerability 361 heteronomy hysteria 653–4 melancholia 653 Hippocratic medicine 803–4 history 82–3 holothymic delusions 755 homophobia 559 homosexuality 559, 561 DSM 992–3 hope and anger 832 and anxiety 479 in mental health care 976 Page 22 of 53 882, 884–5, 886–7, 889, 890, 892 426 235–47, 274 646, 965–6 hermeneutical phenomenology; understanding human rights law 859 humors 803–4 hyperkinetic disorders 446 hyperphagia 529, 531 hyperreflexivity alterity 385 auditory–verbal hallucinations introspection 253, 604–5, 606 normality 292 psychosis risk 845, 846–7 schizophrenia 469, 598–602, schizophrenic autism 816 hypervigilance hallucinations hypochondria delusions 625 Minkowski 108 phenomenological psychotherapy hypofrontality 608 hyponomy 657 hysteria 566, 567, 573 anxiety 477 bodily psychopathology 510, 512 life-world 649–64 psychoanalysis 1046 ICD see International Classification of Diseases Ichstörungen Scale (IS) 499 ideal types 1021–2, 1023, 1024 IDEA (Identity and Eating Disorder) questionnaire identity anorexia nervosa 360 borderline personality disorder drug addiction 693 eating disorders 534, 535, 711–16 gender 552, 553, 554–5, 559, 61 gender identity disorder 993 hermeneutical phenomenology narrative see narrative identity narrative self 467 personhood 338–40, 341 psychiatric ethics 979–81, 982, Ricoeur 75–7 schizophrenia 728, 740 social see social identity stigmatized 462 idionomia 361, 965 illness anxiety 479 Binswanger 114–16 604–5, 607, 609, 610–11, 738 797 (ICD) 361, 713–14 827–8, 830, 719–20 236–8, 241, 242–3, 244–5 Blankenburg 163 dialectical model of 77 Gadamer 65, 66, 67–8, 69–70 theory of (Heidegger) 31–2 time 435 illogicality 451, 452 imagery, loss of 451, 452 imagination and fear 478 paranoia 777–9, 783 schizophrenic autism 819, imaginative variation 274 imitation, in autism 699, 704 immanence 92 impulsivity borderline personality disorder eating disorders 714 in-between 875 includence 144–6, 744, 808 in-depth interviews 925, 926 insomnia autonomy 379 depressive delusions 761, instantaneity, and dysphoria Intellectual Developmental Disorders intellectual disability (ID) adaptive behavior 1096–7 emotional and spiritual life expressing mental health suffering practical experience 1088–90 quality of life 1097 self-experience 1084–6 social experience 1091–3 unitary intelligence 1094–5 intelligence, unitary 1094–5 intentionality 316, 325–34 arc 1065–77 attention 443 autism 700, 704–6 clinical phenomenology 219, cognitive science 268 concentration 443 consciousness 417, 418 Deleuze 92 depressive delusions 761 drug addiction 683, 688, 689, emotion 309–10, 312 Page 24 of 53 828, 831 762 669, 670 1080 1078–80, 1081, 1082–3, 1098 1087–8 1093–4 emotions and affects vs. moods Husserl 15–16, 92 implicit temporality 433 introspection 250, 251, 252, mental 327–9 normality 286–7 phenomenology 207, 211, 212, schizophrenia 738 self 300, 302 Stein 22 intercorporeality, in autism International Classification of Diseases attention deficit disorder 446 autism 1081 catatonia 522 clinicians, formation of 1010 conversion disorder 522n delusional mood 743 depressive delusions 754 intellectual disability 1079, obsessive-compulsive conditions personality disorders 384, 471 Praecox Gefühl 876 prolonged grief disorder 199n psychiatric classification 1016, psychopathy 883, 884 schizophrenia 727, 729, 731, somatization disorder 573 values 355 International Classification of Functioning (ICF) interpersonality 651–5, 660, interpretation emotion 308–9, 312 hermeneutical phenomenology intersubjective-systems theory intersubjectivity affectivity 618 atmospheres 872–3, 877 autism 703–4 autonomy 377 depression 619, 622–3, 624, depressive delusions 762, 766 embodiment 370, 930, 931 empathy 891 hallucinations 501, 502 intentional arc 1066, 1069, mania 627 normality 288, 289, 290, 291 745 254, 255–6 927–8, 942 704–6 (ICD)

1080, 1095, 1096 636 1017 732, 733, 948 1079, 1080 661 239, 240, 242 896 1074, 1075 schizophrenia 738, 741 temporality 434–5, 439 interviews, in-depth 925, 926 introspection 248–61 anomalous self-experience research 604–5, 606, 607, 612 cognitive science 269 psycho-phenomenological 254–6 intrusive derealization 730 ipseity see self IQ 1094, 1095, 1097 irritable temperament (Kraepelin) 804, 811 jikaku 153 justice 778, 859 Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test (KAIT) 1095 kinesis 143 knowledge generalized and individual 1009–10 Levinas Schemer 58, 59–60, 61 Korsakov syndrome 447–8 landscape 129 language autism 703 of body and eating 717–19 disorders 450–8 gender identity 561 hermeneutics 235–6, 240, 243 Kimura 151–2 phenomenological approach 212, 213 Ricoeur 75–6 transgenderism 556 law 859–71 life narratives see autobiography life-world America’s social life-world 987–1003 Husserl 13 phenomenological psychotherapy 959–62 limit situations, borderline personality disorder 676–8 linguality 64 linguistic analysis 452–3, 455 locked-in syndrome 424 logical empiricism 275 logorrhoea 450, 451 loneliness 550 longing 618 love Binswanger 114, 115 Schemer 60 schizophrenia 738, 741 temporality 434–5, 439 interviews, in-depth 925, 926 introspection 248–61 anomalous self-experience research 604–5, 606, 607, 612 cognitive science 269 psycho-phenomenological 254–6 intrusive derealization 730 ipseity see self IQ 1094, 1095, 1097 irritable temperament (Kraepelin) 804, 811 jikaku 153 justice 778, 859 Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test (KAIT) 1095 kinesis 143 knowledge generalized and individual 1009–10 Levinas Schemer 58, 59–60, 61 Korsakov syndrome 447–8 landscape 129 language autism 703 of body and eating 717–19 disorders 450–8 gender identity 561 hermeneutics 235–6, 240, 243 Kimura 151–2 phenomenological approach 212, 213 Ricoeur 75–6 transgenderism 556 law 859–71 life narratives see autobiography life-world America’s social life-world 987–1003 Husserl 13 phenomenological psychotherapy 959–62 limit situations, borderline personality disorder 676–8 linguality 64 linguistic analysis 452–3, 455 locked-in syndrome 424 logical empiricism 275 logorrhoea 450, 451 loneliness 550 longing 618 love Binswanger 114, 115 Schemer 60 MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool 378 madness Derrida 89–90 Foucault 90 major depressive disorder see depression mania anomalous self-experience research 603–4 attention and concentration impairment 445 autobiography 1053 bodily psychopathology 510 and drug addiction, comparison between 689 and hysteria, comparison between 659, 661 phenomenology 626–8 and psychopathy, comparison between 882, 887–9 self 1026 stupor 424 thought, speech, and language disorders 452 time 394, 395, 432, 435, 437, 618, 626–8 manic-depressive psychosis see bipolar disorder manic temperament (Kraepelin) 804, 811 mannerism, hysterical 659 materialism 367, 368, 369, 371 meaning 177 media America’s social life-world 988–9 eating disorders 718–19 medicine anxiety 475 Boss 119 Gadamer 64, 65–7, 68–70, 71 Ling 185 megalomania 776, 779, 781, 782–3, 784 melancholia anomalous self-experience research 603 anxiety 478, 480 atmospheres 876, 878 delusions 624–5, 628, 739, 753–65 eating disorders 529 endogeneity 143 heteronomy 653 and hysteria, comparison between 659 personality type 619, 626 phenomenological psychotherapy 967 self 468, 470, 1026 social identity 657 subjectivity, structures of 931 subject–object correlation 287 Tellenbach 142, 143–6 MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool 378 madness Derrida 89–90 Foucault 90 major depressive disorder see depression mania anomalous self-experience research 603–4 attention and concentration impairment 445 autobiography 1053 bodily psychopathology 510 and drug addiction, comparison between 689 and hysteria, comparison between 659, 661 phenomenology 626–8 and psychopathy, comparison between 882, 887–9 self 1026 stupor 424 thought, speech, and language disorders 452 time 394, 395, 432, 435, 437, 618, 626–8 manic-depressive psychosis see bipolar disorder manic temperament (Kraepelin) 804, 811 mannerism, hysterical 659 materialism 367, 368, 369, 371 meaning 177 media America’s social life-world 988–9 eating disorders 718–19 medicine anxiety 475 Boss 119 Gadamer 64, 65–7, 68–70, 71 Ling 185 megalomania 776, 779, 781, 782–3, 784 melancholia anomalous self-experience research 603 anxiety 478, 480 atmospheres 876, 878 delusions 624–5, 628, 739, 753–65 eating disorders 529 endogeneity 143 heteronomy 653 and hysteria, comparison between 659 personality type 619, 626 phenomenological psychotherapy 967 self 468, 470, 1026 social identity 657 subjectivity, structures of 931 subject–object correlation 287 Tellenbach 142, 143–6 temporality 1047 time 394, 395, 431, 618 see also depression Melancholia Gefühl 876 memoirs see autobiography memory 442, 444–5, 449 anterograde 445 borderline personality disorder 834 declarative (explicit) 444, 445 disorders 447–9 episodic 445 grief 545 impairment 424 long-term 445 loss see amnesia Merleau-Monty 1068–9 procedural (implicit) 444–5 retrograde 445 semantic 445 short-term (working) 445 subjectivity, structures of 931 unconscious 322, 323 mental deficiency 523 mental echolalia 523 mental health services 1033–4 mental intentionality 327–9 metamorphopsia 516 metaphysics 60–1 microsomatagnosia 516 migraine 571, 572 Fineness, loss of (schizophrenia) 728 minimal self auditory–verbal hallucinations 793, 796, 799–800 ipseity disturbance model 470, 597, 598, 602 phenomenology 1057n psychosis risk 848 schizophrenic autism 822 subjectivity 930 mirror neurons 17 misoplegia 515 mistrust 749–50 mitigated echolalia 523 mizukara 154, 155 modes 192, 194–6, 198–203 Moebius Syndrome 332 monotony, and dysphoria 669–70 mood disorders Effective regulation difficulty 533 temporality 1047 time 394, 395, 431, 618 see also depression Melancholia Gefühl 876 memoirs see autobiography memory 442, 444–5, 449 anterograde 445 borderline personality disorder 834 declarative (explicit) 444, 445 disorders 447–9 episodic 445 grief 545 impairment 424 long-term 445 loss see amnesia Merleau-Monty 1068–9 procedural (implicit) 444–5 retrograde 445 semantic 445 short-term (working) 445 subjectivity, structures of 931 unconscious 322, 323 mental deficiency 523 mental echolalia 523 mental health services 1033–4 mental intentionality 327–9 metamorphopsia 516 metaphysics 60–1 microsomatagnosia 516 migraine 571, 572 Fineness, loss of (schizophrenia) 728 minimal self auditory–verbal hallucinations 793, 796, 799–800 ipseity disturbance model 470, 597, 598, 602 phenomenology 1057n psychosis risk 848 schizophrenic autism 822 subjectivity 930 mirror neurons 17 misoplegia 515 mistrust 749–50 mitigated echolalia 523 mizukara 154, 155 modes 192, 194–6, 198–203 Moebius Syndrome 332 monotony, and dysphoria 669–70 mood disorders Effective regulation difficulty 533 anomalous self-experience research 603 anthropological vulnerability to 806–7 appetite loss 530 attention impairment 426 catatonia 525n delusions 753–68 eating disorders 529 life-world 617–33 stupor 424 time 437, 617–33 see also depression; mania moods 311, 312, 459–60 and affects, distinction between 666, 831 Befindlichkeit 348–9, 351 delusional 743–52 disorders see mood disorders and emotions, distinction between 195n, 460 Heidegger 194–5, 198, 307 intentionality 330 phenomenological approach 212–13 and temperaments, distinction between 9-9 time 617–18 morality alterity 384 autonomy 375 conscience 398, 400–1 obsessions 579, 580 see also ethics motivation Stein 22–4 variations of global motivational structures (Husserl) 16 motor disorders 519–20 motor intentionality 327, 329–30, 331 multiple personality disorder 571 Autism 450, 451, 452 narcissism depression 620 hysteria 655 narcissistic personality disorder 994–5 paranoia 772, 773, 774–7, 781–2 phenomenological psychotherapy 967 narrative identity 1057–8 borderline personality disorder 675–8 Ricoeur 75–7 narratives autobiographical see autobiography qualitative research 933 natural attitude 209–10 natural evidence, loss of 16–17 naturalism 274–5, 281 anomalous self-experience research 603 anthropological vulnerability to 806–7 appetite loss 530 attention impairment 426 catatonia 525n delusions 753–68 eating disorders 529 life-world 617–33 stupor 424 time 437, 617–33 see also depression; mania moods 311, 312, 459–60 and affects, distinction between 666, 831 Befindlichkeit 348–9, 351 delusional 743–52 disorders see mood disorders and emotions, distinction between 195n, 460 Heidegger 194–5, 198, 307 intentionality 330 phenomenological approach 212–13 and temperaments, distinction between 9-9 time 617–18 morality alterity 384 autonomy 375 conscience 398, 400–1 obsessions 579, 580 see also ethics motivation Stein 22–4 variations of global motivational structures (Husserl) 16 motor disorders 519–20 motor intentionality 327, 329–30, 331 multiple personality disorder 571 Autism 450, 451, 452 narcissism depression 620 hysteria 655 narcissistic personality disorder 994–5 paranoia 772, 773, 774–7, 781–2 phenomenological psychotherapy 967 narrative identity 1057–8 borderline personality disorder 675–8 Ricoeur 75–7 narratives autobiographical see autobiography qualitative research 933 natural attitude 209–10 natural evidence, loss of 16–17 naturalism 274–5, 281 Husserl 14–15 neuroscience 276 phenomenology 277–80 negative interpersonal disposition 829–30 neologisms 450, 451, 453 neopositivism 275 neural network theory 1070 neurocomputational modeling 499 neurodevelopmental disorders 1078 see also neurodevelopmental perspective 1082 neurodiversity 1078–108 adaptive behavior and environmental attunement autism spectrum disorder 1082 complex vulnerability of 1082–3 emotional and spiritual life 1087–8 intellectual disability 1078–80 life experience, new outcome for 1097–8 mental health suffering, expressing 1093–4 and neurodevelopmental disorders 1078 neurodevelopmental perspective 1082 practical experience 1088–90 self-experience of 1083–6 social experience 1090–3 unitary intelligence 1094–5 neurology, and hysteria 567 neurophenomenology 254, 277–81 neuropsychiatry 43 neuropsychology bodily psychopathology 513–14 thought, speech, and language disorders neuroscience 276–7, 281, 909–24, 1065–77 autism 704 bodily-self disorders 1117–18 catatonia 522 cognitive 263, 264, 268, 269, 275, 276, 277, consciousness 419, 424, 425 depression, spontaneous activity’s spatial structure and self in eating disorders 716 experience and brain, “common currency” between experience and brain, methodological gap between naturalism 275 schizophrenia, spontaneous activity’s temporal structure and hallucination in spatiotemporal psychopathology vs. phenomenological psychopathology understanding 411–12 neurosis anxiety 476, 477, 478, 480–1 bodily psychopathology 512 conscience 399, 401 autism; intellectual disability 1096–7 453–4, 455 281, 424, 425, 524, 1070–1 914–15 909–13, 918–20 909–11 916–18 918–22 hysterical 650 obsessive-compulsive conditions 639–40 psychoanalysis 1046 schizophrenic autism 822, 823 “New Introspectionists” 253 night eating syndrome 533 nihilism 401, 403, 404 nihilistic delusions bodily psychopathology 516 mood disorder 760, 763 time 625 non-aphasic misnaming 450–5 non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI) 832–4 dysphoria 671–2 normality 284–96 America’s social life-world 999 genetic phenomenology 228–32 Husserl 15–16 as optimal 229–30 norm transcendence 230–2 nosography 2–3, 4 nostalgia 618 objectifying attitude and phenomenology 316–17 objective mind (Jasper) 409–10 object relations theory 182, 188 obsessions 577, 579–82 agoraphobia 578 autism 700 and delusions, distinction between 755 phenomenological psychotherapy 967 obsessive-compulsive disorder (obsessive-compulsive disorder) 580, 581 attention and concentration impairment 446, 447 bodily psychopathology 510 body image disturbance 530 life-world 634–48 neuroscience 1073 time 431, 437–8, 439 oneroid state 423 onozukara 154, 155 ontological security 187 ontology atmospheres 873–5 existential 196–8 Heidegger 27, 29, 31, 82, 196, 197 naturalism 275 personhood 337–8 unconscious 320–1 hysterical 650 obsessive-compulsive conditions 639–40 psychoanalysis 1046 schizophrenic autism 822, 823 “New Introspectionists” 253 night eating syndrome 533 nihilism 401, 403, 404 nihilistic delusions bodily psychopathology 516 mood disorder 760, 763 time 625 non-aphasic misnaming 450–5 non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI) 832–4 dysphoria 671–2 normality 284–96 America’s social life-world 999 genetic phenomenology 228–32 Husserl 15–16 as optimal 229–30 norm transcendence 230–2 nosography 2–3, 4 nostalgia 618 objectifying attitude and phenomenology 316–17 objective mind (Jasper) 409–10 object relations theory 182, 188 obsessions 577, 579–82 agoraphobia 578 autism 700 and delusions, distinction between 755 phenomenological psychotherapy 967 obsessive-compulsive disorder (obsessive-compulsive disorder) 580, 581 attention and concentration impairment 446, 447 bodily psychopathology 510 body image disturbance 530 life-world 634–48 neuroscience 1073 time 431, 437–8, 439 oneroid state 423 onozukara 154, 155 ontological security 187 ontology atmospheres 873–5 existential 196–8 Heidegger 27, 29, 31, 82, 196, 197 naturalism 275 personhood 337–8 unconscious 320–1 operationalism, phenomenological critiques of 1017–18 operational psychiatry 944 optima (genetic phenomenology) 229–30, 231–2 optimality, and normality 284, 289–91 orthorexia 530, 532 otherness see alterity Oxford School 356 pain, in borderline personality disorder 831–2 palilalia 521n, 523 panic disorder/panic attacks agoraphobia 578 anomalous self-experience research 605–6, 607 attention and concentration impairment 446 bodily psychopathology 510 paranoia 769–88 depressive delusions 755 Gaupp 135 Kimura 150, 153 Kraepelin 135 Kretschmer 135 memory disorders 447 shame and anger 835 paranoid atmospheres 877 paranoid personality disorder 384, 771 paranoid schizophrenia 157 paraphasias 450, 451 paraphrenia 737 paraphrenic delusions 773–4 passivity bodily psychopathology 515 schizophrenia 729, 730–1, 732–3 time 435–6 pathic sensing (Straps) 128–9, 130, 131 pathology, schizophrenia 738 perception and hallucinations 485, 486, 487, 489, 491–2, 494, 495–8 introspection 252 and motivation 23 normality 287–9 phenomenological approach 211 Straps 127–31 Kitchener 252 perceptual integration disturbance, in schizophrenia 610–11 perfectionism, and eating disorders 712 performance, cult of 146 perpetrator role, borderline persons 677 perplexity, and psychosis risk 844–6, 848 persecution 776, 779–84 operationalism, phenomenological critiques of 1017–18 operational psychiatry 944 optima (genetic phenomenology) 229–30, 231–2 optimality, and normality 284, 289–91 orthorexia 530, 532 otherness see alterity Oxford School 356 pain, in borderline personality disorder 831–2 palilalia 521n, 523 panic disorder/panic attacks agoraphobia 578 anomalous self-experience research 605–6, 607 attention and concentration impairment 446 bodily psychopathology 510 paranoia 769–88 depressive delusions 755 Gaupp 135 Kimura 150, 153 Kraepelin 135 Kretschmer 135 memory disorders 447 shame and anger 835 paranoid atmospheres 877 paranoid personality disorder 384, 771 paranoid schizophrenia 157 paraphasias 450, 451 paraphrenia 737 paraphrenic delusions 773–4 passivity bodily psychopathology 515 schizophrenia 729, 730–1, 732–3 time 435–6 pathic sensing (Straps) 128–9, 130, 131 pathology, schizophrenia 738 perception and hallucinations 485, 486, 487, 489, 491–2, 494, 495–8 introspection 252 and motivation 23 normality 287–9 phenomenological approach 211 Straps 127–31 Kitchener 252 perceptual integration disturbance, in schizophrenia 610–11 perfectionism, and eating disorders 712 performance, cult of 146 perpetrator role, borderline persons 677 perplexity, and psychosis risk 844–6, 848 persecution 776, 779–84 personal autonomy 374–5 personalistic attitude 14–15 personality development 135–6 personality disorders alterity 384 conscience 403 hysteria, dissociation, somatization, and conversion neuroscience 1074 paranoid 384, 771 selfhood 468, 471 personality theory 535 personality types 471 conversion disorder 573 depression 619–20 depressive delusions 757–8 obsessive-compulsive conditions paranoia 772, 774–7 somatization disorder 573 personhood 335–43 hermeneutical phenomenology Ricoeur 74–5 pervasive developmental disorder phantom concreteness 259n phantom limb 513 phenomenal consciousness phenomenological anthropology phenomenological approach phenomenological compensation phenomenological psychiatry cognitive science 263 embodiment 371 Husserl 255n Jasper 101–2 Kimura 148 Minkowski 105, 109 neuroscience 910, 912 schizophrenic autism 812, 817–18 selfhood 466 Straps 126 Tellenbach 142 time 431 phenomenological psychoanalysis phenomenological psychology cognitive science 263 naturalism 280, 281 neurophenomenology 281 Straps 127–8 Page 33 of 53 566, 572 639–40 see also Effective temperaments 244 1081 484–508 219, 222 205–15 106–7, 820–3 phenomenological psychopathology America’s social life-world auditory–verbal hallucinations autobiography 1053–64 autonomy 377–9 Beauvoir 52–5 Befindlichkeit 350 Binswanger 112–14, 116, 192, Blankenburg 158, 163 bodily psychopathology 512, Boss 121–3 clinical decision-making 1031–41 clinicians, formation of 1004–15 cognitive science 264 comparison with other forms of psychopathology conscience 398 depression 618–19, 622 Derrida 89 EASE 947 emotion 307, 312, 313 Anon 179, 180 Foucault 90 hallucinations 498–9 and hermeneutical phenomenology Husserl 12, 13–18 hysteria, dissociation, conversion, and somatization intentionality 326 introspection 249, 257, 258–9 Jasper 116, 515, 944, 952 mood disorders 617 neurodiversity 1078–108 neurophenomenology 281 neuroscience 910, 911, 913, normality 291–2 origins 515 paranoia 778, 786 personhood 336, 340, 341 psychiatric classification 1016–30 psychiatric ethics 972–86 as psychiatry’s basic science psychoanalysis 1042–52 psychopathy 882–4 psychotherapy 952–71 qualitative research 926–7, 930, quantitative research 942–5 reasons for teaching 1008–9 Ricoeur schizophrenia 597, 603, 608, 987–1003 790, 792, 799 515 515–16 919 243–5 573, 651 918–22 3–5 schizophrenic autism 817 Straps 130–1, 132 subject matter 191–204 Tellenbach 142 thought, speech, and language disorders time 394 toolbox for psychotherapy and 953–8 values 361–2, 364 phenomenological psychotherapy Decalogue 968–9 meaning, quest for 958–63 PHD (Phenomenology, Hermeneutics, Psycho-Dynamics) method toolbox for phenomenological psychopathology and phenomenological reduction phenomenology 191, 952 Effective 808–9 affectivity 459, 618 affects and moods, distinction between alterity 381, 383, 387 anxiety 476, 478–9 application of 213–14 applied vs. “pure”/“fundamental” approach 205–15 atmospheres 875–6, 879 auditory–verbal hallucinations 789–802 autonomy 374, 375, 378–9 Basaglia 166, 167 Binswanger 113, 114 Blankenburg 158, 159, 163 bodily psychopathology 514–16 Boss 119–20 Brentano 206, 376 clinical decision making 1032 cognitive sciences 262–72 complex perspective 770 conscience 398–9 consciousness 418–19, 420 contextualism 896 defined 88, 206, 273–4 Deleuze 91–3 delusional mood 744–7, 750 depression 618–20 depressive delusions 759–64 Derrida 88–90 dissociation 569, 571 drug addiction 682–4, 686, 692, 693 EASE 947 eating disorders 530, 531, 533, 534, 454–5 952–71 962–8 953–8 209 831 197 535, 710, 715 embodiment 368–70, 371 emotion 307, 309, 312 essentials 927–9 Anon 175, 177, 178, 179 Foucault 90–1 grief 538–50 hallucinations 484, 490–2, 494–503 Heidegger 197, 206–14, 221n, 274, 683, 815, 817, and hermeneutics 235–47 historical context 376–7 Husserl 11, 119–20, 197, 205–13, 235, 273–4, 942n, 946, 953, 961, 1075 hysteria 651–61 intentionality 207–8, 325–7, 330, 331 as interpretive and hermeneutical 211–12 introspection 248–59 Jasper Ling 182, 183, 185 law 860 Levinas 80, 81–4 mania 626–8 memory 444 Merleau-Monty 120 methodology 928–34 Minkowski 106 naturalized 277–80, 929 normality 284–9 and the objectifying attitude 316–17 obsessive-compulsive conditions 634–46 operationalism critiques 1017–18 paranoia 778, 779, 780, 781 pathological grief 199 personhood 336–7, 338 psychiatric diagnosis 634 psychosis risk 845 qualitative research 927–34 quantitative research 941–2 Ricoeur 72, 73–5, 77 Sartre 120 Schemer 58–9 schizophrenia 733 schizophrenic autism 812–17, 818, 820, 823–4 as the science of subjectivity 205 selfhood 466, 468 Straps 127 thought insertion 585–6, 588, 590, 592 time 389–94, 438, 463 trauma 899–901 embodiment 368–70, 371 emotion 307, 309, 312 essentials 927–9 Anon 175, 177, 178, 179 Foucault 90–1 grief 538–50 hallucinations 484, 490–2, 494–503 Heidegger 197, 206–14, 221n, 274, 683, 815, 817, and hermeneutics 235–47 historical context 376–7 Husserl 11, 119–20, 197, 205–13, 235, 273–4, 942n, 946, 953, 961, 1075 hysteria 651–61 intentionality 207–8, 325–7, 330, 331 as interpretive and hermeneutical 211–12 introspection 248–59 Jasper Ling 182, 183, 185 law 860 Levinas 80, 81–4 mania 626–8 memory 444 Merleau-Monty 120 methodology 928–34 Minkowski 106 naturalized 277–80, 929 normality 284–9 and the objectifying attitude 316–17 obsessive-compulsive conditions 634–46 operationalism critiques 1017–18 paranoia 778, 779, 780, 781 pathological grief 199 personhood 336–7, 338 psychiatric diagnosis 634 psychosis risk 845 qualitative research 927–34 quantitative research 941–2 Ricoeur 72, 73–5, 77 Sartre 120 Schemer 58–9 schizophrenia 733 schizophrenic autism 812–17, 818, 820, 823–4 as the science of subjectivity 205 selfhood 466, 468 Straps 127 thought insertion 585–6, 588, 590, 592 time 389–94, 438, 463 trauma 899–901 927, 941, 941n, 942n 277, 683, 815, 817, 927, 928, 930, 941, 941n, 942, unconscious 316–18, 320–1, 322 values 357, 358–60, 362–3 phenol-phenotype 957 philosophical anthropology emotion 308 Anon 174, 175, 178 phobias 577–8, 582 anxiety 480 attention and concentration impairment 446 bodily psychopathology 510 and delusions, distinction between 755 physiognomies 138 pica 529 polyscopic heutoscopy 496 post-traumatic stress disorder (post-traumatic stress disorder) America’s social life-world 999 attention and concentration impairment 446 auditory–verbal hallucinations 796 depersonalization 601 dissociation 571 power law exponent (PLE) 1117 Praecox Gefühl 876 predelusional state (delusional mood) 743–52 pre-melancholia 808 pre-reflective awareness 299–303 implicit temporality 432 selfhood 466–7 Present State Examination (PSE) delusional mood 743 delusional perception 355 schizophrenia 728–9, 730, 731, 732 prisons 996–8 prolonged grief disorder 199n propositions 1068 prototypes 1020, 1023–4 pseudohallucinations (PHs) 485–7, 488, 489, 592 psyche Binswanger 115 Levinas 85 and personality 471 Stein 21–2, 24 psychiatric anthropology see anthropological psychiatry psychiatric classification 1016–30 dimensions 1024–7 phenomenological critiques of operationalism and typification 1029–23 see also tonal Classification of Diseases psychiatric ethics 972–86 physiognomies 138 pica 529 polyscopic heutoscopy 496 post-traumatic stress disorder (post-traumatic stress disorder) America’s social life-world 999 attention and concentration impairment 446 auditory–verbal hallucinations 796 depersonalization 601 dissociation 571 power law exponent (PLE) 1117 Praecox Gefühl 876 predelusional state (delusional mood) 743–52 pre-melancholia 808 pre-reflective awareness 299–303 implicit temporality 432 selfhood 466–7 Present State Examination (PSE) delusional mood 743 delusional perception 355 schizophrenia 728–9, 730, 731, 732 prisons 996–8 prolonged grief disorder 199n propositions 1068 prototypes 1020, 1023–4 pseudohallucinations (PHs) 485–7, 488, 489, 592 psyche Binswanger 115 Levinas 85 and personality 471 Stein 21–2, 24 psychiatric anthropology see anthropological psychiatry psychiatric classification 1016–30 dimensions 1024–7 phenomenological critiques of operationalism and typification 1029–23 see also tonal Classification of Diseases psychiatric ethics 972–86 1017–18 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; Intern autonomy, challenges of 979–81 care and caring 977–9 fragility, strength of 981–4 good life, ambiguity of the 974–7 psychiatry America’s social life-world 990–6 anthropological see anthropological psychiatry anti-psychiatry see anti-psychiatry anxiety 475 atmospheres 872, 873, 876–9 auditory–verbal hallucinations 795, 797 autism 698 Basaglia 166–71 Binswanger 115, 116, 192 Blankenburg 158, 159, 160–2 borderline personality disorder 828 catatonia 524, 525, 526 consciousness 419 Deleuze 93 delusional mood 743, 744 Derrida 89 dysphoria 829 embodiment 368, 370–2 emotion 307 Ey’s definition 161 Anon 176 Foucault 90–1 gender dysphoria 563 grief 199, 538–50 Guattari 93 hermeneutic approach 770 hysteria 567, 649, 650 Jasper 96, 97–9, 102 Kimura 148 Kretschmer 138 Ling 182–3, 186–7 law 859, 860, 863, 868 loneliness as nucleus of 550 Minkowski 109 neuroscience 910 operational revolution 944 organicism 1045, 1047 paranoia 774, 778 personality disorders 471 personhood 335 phenomenological see phenomenological psychiatry phenomenological approach 213, 214 phenomenological psychopathology 3–5, 1042, 1046 autonomy, challenges of 979–81 care and caring 977–9 fragility, strength of 981–4 good life, ambiguity of the 974–7 psychiatry America’s social life-world 990–6 anthropological see anthropological psychiatry anti-psychiatry see anti-psychiatry anxiety 475 atmospheres 872, 873, 876–9 auditory–verbal hallucinations 795, 797 autism 698 Basaglia 166–71 Binswanger 115, 116, 192 Blankenburg 158, 159, 160–2 borderline personality disorder 828 catatonia 524, 525, 526 consciousness 419 Deleuze 93 delusional mood 743, 744 Derrida 89 dysphoria 829 embodiment 368, 370–2 emotion 307 Ey’s definition 161 Anon 176 Foucault 90–1 gender dysphoria 563 grief 199, 538–50 Guattari 93 hermeneutic approach 770 hysteria 567, 649, 650 Jasper 96, 97–9, 102 Kimura 148 Kretschmer 138 Ling 182–3, 186–7 law 859, 860, 863, 868 loneliness as nucleus of 550 Minkowski 109 neuroscience 910 operational revolution 944 organicism 1045, 1047 paranoia 774, 778 personality disorders 471 personhood 335 phenomenological see phenomenological psychiatry phenomenological approach 213, 214 phenomenological psychopathology 3–5, 1042, 1046 phenomenology and diagnoses psychosis risk 840, 844 qualitative research 925 reform 158 schizophrenia 698, 738 standard psychiatric interview Straps 132 Tellenbach 141, 142 values 355–6 psychic representing 322–3 psychic states 36–7 psychoanalysis 778, 1042–52 anti-humanist but anti-naturalist anxiety 475 approach to mental illness 987n Beauvoir 52–3 Binswanger 112, 113, 114, 115, catatonia 525 classical 38–9 comprehension and the incomprehensible, virtues of consciousness, discovery of consciousness as surface 1044–6 Deleuze 93 existential 39–41 Anon 179 field and interpretation 1050–1 Freud 119 Gadamer 69 Guattari 93 hermeneutic approach 770 hysteria 567, 649–50, 653 Laban 84 Ling 182, 186, 188 Merleau-Monty Minkowski 105 neurosis 476 obsessive-compulsive conditions phenomenological 900 Ricoeur 73 schizophrenic autism 814, 822, Tellenbach 142 trauma 896, 898 unconscious 318n, 320–2, 1043, Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual psychogenic psychosis 139 psychology Beauvoir 52 Page 39 of 53 1048–50 116 1046–8 1043–4 636 823 1044–6 (PDM-2) 1016 bodily psychopathology body image 535 Boss 119 conscience 398 consciousness 419 descriptive 226 dysphoria 829 evolutionary 524 explanatory 226 genetic 226 grief 199 hysteria 567, 649 introspection 249, 252–3, Jasper 99–101 Ling 188 personality disorders 471 phenomenological approach physiological 226 schizophrenic autism 823 thought, speech, and language disorders psychomotor disorders 520 Psychopathic Personality Inventory (PPI) psychopathology 175–7, affectivity 461, 462 agenda 1009–13 alterity 384–6 autism 698 Befindlichkeit 350, 351 Blankenburg 158–60, 161, borderline personality disorder cognitive science 263, 266–9 complex perspective 769–70 consciousness 419–28 delusional mood 743 depression 621–6 depressive delusions 754–6 dissociation 568 drug addiction 684, 688 dysphoria 829 eating disorders 535, 710–11 embodiment 370 emotion 307 Gadamer 65, 70–1 hysteria 649, 651, 652 intentionality 325, 331–2 Jasper 99, 377 Kretschmer 134–6, 138 Ling 186 512–13 259 212, 214 452 886 191, 952 162–3 828, 829, 833, 834–5, 715 law 859–71 Levinas 84 Merleau-Monty 43–4 Minkowski 104–5, 106 nature of 1–3 neuroscience 909, 910 paranoia 770–1, 772, 774, personhood 335, 336 psychopathy 882–95 psychosis risk 844, 848, 850 schizophrenia 728–33, 737, schizophrenic autism 812, schizophrenic delusions 736 thought insertion 588 thought, speech, and language disorders time 394–5, 435–8, 439, 463 values 355, 359–60, 362 psychopathy conscience 398 and hysteria 652 neuroscience 1073 psychopathology 882–95 psychosis Effective 841–2, 845 Effective temperaments 804, alterity 385 anomalous self-experience research attention and concentration impairment auditory–verbal hallucinations Binswanger 114–16 bodily psychopathology 512 Boss 123 catatonia 524 decision-making capacity delusional mood 743, 744, depressive 510, 603–4, 796 derealization 569 dissociation 569, 570 drug addiction 688 EASE 947 empathic understanding 955 empathy, second-order 1011 hallucinations 488–9, 501–2 High-Risk states 839–58 hysteria 653 intentionality 331 introspection 258, 259 Page 41 of 53 780, 783, 785 873 813, 814, 817, 819 450–2 603–4 425, 446, 447 798–800 863–4 750 Kretschmer 135, 136–7, 138, 139 Ling 187 mania as subclass of 888 vs. memory disorders 447 neuroscience 1072 Open Dialogue method 139 paranoia 771, 782 phenomenological psychopathology psychoanalysis 1046–7 psychogenic 139 schizophrenic autism 814, 822 schizotypy 1114 Straps 130–1 subjectivity, structures of 931 synthetic 682–3, 693 thought insertion 584–92 see also psychotherapy 952–71 Binswanger 115 Blankenburg 159, 160–2, 163 borderline personality disorder Boss 119 Decalogue 968–9 drug addiction 690, 692–3 Freud 119 Jasper 101–2 Levinas 84–6 meaning, quest for 958–63 obsessive-compulsive disorder 438 PHD method 962–8 phenomenological approach 214, toolbox for phenomenological psychopathology and psychotic anxiety 932 psychotic depression 510, 603–4, psychotic work 746, 750 qualitative methodologies (QMs) qualitative research (QR) 925–40 cautionary remarks 936–7 phenomenological psychopathology background phenomenological toolkit 929–34 phenomenology, essentials of 927–9 phenomenology, naturalizing 929 standards 925–6 transpersonal constructs, building up of transpersonal constructs, validity of quantitative research 941–51 EASE 945–7 phenomenological psychopathology Page 42 of 53 943, 1046 bipolar disorder; schizophrenia 634 953–8 796 925 926–7 934–5 935–6 quality of life, and neurodevelopmental disorders 1097–8 942–5 phenomenology 941–2 querulous delusions 770, 773n, 775, racism America’s social life-world 988, 989n, Anon 174, 176, 177, 178, 179 rage 775–6 reality disturbed grip on 844–6 function of (Janet) 106 vital contact with (Minkowski) 105–6 reason Anon 177–8 Husserl 15–16 reasoning 1070 reciprocity, in autism 703–4 reference, sensitive delusion of 134–6 reflex hallucinations 496–9 reflexive philosophy 72–3 reform psychiatry 158 reification of others 887, 888–9 religious approaches to mental illness remanence 144–6, 744, 808 representation and psychic representing, distinction between Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC) Research Domain Operational Classification (RDoC) responsibility 981–4 resynchronization therapy 629 retention 317–19, 320 risk assessment, clinical decision making Royal College of Psychiatrists 1012 rubber hand illusion (RHI) 1110–12, rumination depression 919, 947 disorder 529 neuroscience 919 phenomenology 931, 932 sadness continuum in depression 480 and depression, distinction between eating disorders 718 Freud 476 salience dysregulation, in schizophrenia salience hypothesis, abnormal 845, Scale of Prodromal Symptoms (SOPS) SCAN (Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry) schizoïda see schizotypal disorder schizoid personality Kretschmer 137 779, 783–5 993, 998n, 138 987n 322–3 729, 731 909, 1016, 1018, 1025 1034 1114, 1115–16 608, 609 846 842 731, 732 Merleau-Monty schizoid states 182, 186, 187 schizophrenia agency, sense of 1112–14 alterity 385–6, 387 America’s social life-world 993, 998 anomalous self-experience research atmospheres 872–3, 876, 878 attention and concentration impairment auditory–verbal hallucinations 792–3, autism 696, 697–8, 733, 736, 737, 738–41 autobiography 1053 autonomy 378 Befindlichkeit 351 Binswanger 113 and bipolar disorder, comparison between Blankenburg 157, 158, 160, 163 Bleuler 105 bodily psychopathology 510, 512, 514–15 bodily self 1109–23 body image disturbance 530, 534 body ownership in 1110–12 Boss 122, 123 catatonia 521, 521n, 523, 525n cognitive science 263, 264, 265, 268, conscience 403–4 core disturbance ( Grundstörung ) 490–2 core of 737–9 decision-making capacity 863–4, 866–7 delusional mood 744–51 delusional perception 355 delusions 599, 729–30, 731, 733, 736–42 depersonalization/derealization 569, diathesis-stress model 105 EASE 17, 598, 602–5, 607, 611–12, embodiment 371, 372 empathic understanding 955 first rank symptoms (FRS) 727–35, 737 Gestalt 944–5 hallucinations 484, 487n, 489–502 hermeneutical phenomenology 244 High-Risk states for psychosis 839, 840, and hysteria, comparison between 653, intentionality 331 introspection 253, 258, 259 intuition in diagnostic process 1013 ipseity disturbance model (IDM) 331, Page 44 of 53 602–7 424, 425, 446–7 794, 796–8, 812–26, 937, 945, 1080, 1081 737, 740, 753, 764, 918, 922 570 945–7, 948 841–2, 845–6, 849 658 332, 597–605, 606, 607, 608, 609, 611 Jasper 137 Kimura 142, 148–55 Kretschmer 134, 135, 136, 137 Ling 182, 186 life-world 597–616 memory impairment 448 Minkowski 105, 106, 107, 108, 109 mood 311 naturalistic and personalistic attitudes 15 neurocognitive dimensions 607–12 neuroscience 911, 914, 915, 916–18, 919, normality 292 paranoid 157 phenomenological phenotype 1110–12 phenomenological psychopathology 943 phenomenological psychotherapy 965, 967 phenomenological toolkit 929 psychiatric classification 1017, 1020 and psychopathy 883, 891 self 299, 303, 468–70, 471, 472, 795–6, 797–8 self–other boundary 1113–14 spatiality 671 stupor 424 subjectivity, structures of 931 subject–object correlation 287 thought, speech, and language disorders time 394, 395, 431, 435–6, 437, 439, 628n touch 1113–14 understanding 410–11 values 355, 358, 361 world-view 965 Schizophrenia Proneness Instrument (SPI) schizophrenic autism 696, 697–8, 733, 736, schizothymia 805–6, 809 schizotypal disorder bodily self 1109, 1114–15, 1116, 1117 delusional mood 744 Minkowski 105, 109 selfhood 471 Scientology, Church of 995 Seasonal Effective Disorder (SAD) 462 second-order empathy 956 selective amnesia 571 self 299–305, 337, 465–74 anger 674, 832 anorexia nervosa 360 archaeology of the 322–3 Binswanger 114 1073, 1074, 1026, 1027 452, 454, 584–92 842 737, 738–41, 812–26, 937, 945, 1080, 1081 bodily self in schizophrenia and the body 1109–10 borderline personality disorder concepts of 465–7 depression 915, 919 dimensional approach to psychiatric classification disorders 467–71 dysphoria 672 EASE 945 eating disorders 711–14, 716 embodiment 930 “experiential self” doctrines fragile 236–8, 241, 242, 244, 245 hermeneutical phenomenology Kimura 149–50, 154–5 Levinas 85 as a narrative structure 467 narrative theory of the 149 neuroscience 910, 912, 915, 919, “no self” doctrines 465–6 obsessions 579, 580 pathology 303–4 as a person 467 and personhood 338, 339–40 phenomenological psychotherapy psychiatric ethics 979–81, 982, Ricoeur 74–5 schizophrenia 728, 733 schizophrenic autism 815, 817, time 463 self-alienation 729 self-constitution 17 self-disorders auditory–verbal hallucinations psychosis risk 844, 848–9 schizophrenia 600–7, 744n self-esteem, and eating disorders self-experience, anomalous 600–7 self-injury see non-suicidal self-injury self-narratives see autobiography self-presence, diminished psychosis risk 847–8 schizophrenia 599–602, 604–5, self-reference delusional mood 746 depressive delusions 755 self-reflection 101–2 Page 46 of 53 1109–23 830–1 1026, 1027 466–7 236–8, 239–40, 241–3, 244–5 960 983, 984 818 792–3, 797–8, 799 712 609, 610–11 Self-Report of Psychopathy–Short Form (SRP-SF) semantic dementia 448 sensations 310–11, 312 senses 127, 128–31 sensitive delusion of reference serial connections model 139 sex development, disorders of (DSD) sexuality Beauvoir 53 drug addiction 687 Merleau-Monty 45, 46–7 sexual orientation 559, 561 Sexualtheorie 697–8 shame and anger 674 borderline personality disorder paranoia 775–6 Schemer 59 sleep 286 sociability, syncratic 1074 social anhedonia 843 social anxiety 529 social identity 555–6 hysteria 657–8 melancholia 657 phenomenological approach social interaction 17–18 social phobia 578 social role 555 sociology Basaglia 165, 168 Blankenburg 158, 161 phenomenological approach Weber 98 solipsism 729, 730 solitary confinement 997 somatic symptoms disorder (SSD) somatization 566, 572–3 somatoform disorders 650 somatoparaphrenia 514, 515 cognitive science 266–7 psychological accounts 513 source-monitoring abnormalities, in schizophrenia sovereignty 179 spatiality anger 673 atmospheres 878 depression 914–15 886 134–6, 138 555 668–9, 834–6 depressive delusions 762 drug addiction 689, 691 dysphoria 671 eating disorders 711, 719–20 hysteria 656, 659 neuroscience 910–15, 918–22 normality 286 obsessive-compulsive conditions schizophrenia 671 spatiotemporal psychopathology comparison with other forms of psychopathology neuroscience 910–22 speech disorders 450–8 poverty of 450, 451 pressure of 450, 451, 452 spirituality, and neurodevelopmental disorders static phenomenology 225–7, 228, static understanding 635 obsessive-compulsive conditions stereotype of speech 450, 451 stigma America’s social life-world 989, intellectual disability 1091–2 psychiatric ethics 982 stress, and dissociation 571 stroke, and dissociation 572 structuralism 158 structuration theory 555–6 Structured Interview for Prodromal Symptoms (SIPS) stupor 423–4 subjectivity atmospheres 872–4 autobiography 1054 catatonia 524, 525 clinical phenomenology 219 cognitive science 264, 265 consciousness 418, 419 depressive delusions 763 drug addiction 691, 692 eating disorders 531, 532 as embodied, embedded, and enworlded hermeneutical phenomenology intentionality 325, 1066–8, 1070–1 introspection 248, 250, 256 normality 288, 289 personhood 336, 337 phenomenology 205, 927, 928, 643–4 919 1087–8 232–3 635–9, 645 990, 991, 993, 994, 995, 998n, 999 210–11 236–7, 241, 1073, 1075 930–1 psychosis 843 retention 317–19 schizophrenia 605 and subjectivism, distinction between thought insertion 585–6 transgenderism 556 subject–object correlation substance use disorders suffering Befindlichkeit 350–1 Blankenburg 161, 163 dialectical model of 77 hermeneutical phenomenology Levinas neurodevelopmental disorders personhood 335, 340–2 Tellenbach 143 suicidality borderline personality disorder conscience 398 depression 625 depressive delusions 756, paranoia 781, 783 psychosis risk 843–4 syllogisms 452 sympathy 882, 891–2 symptomatology 2 synaesthesia 875 synchronization 434–5, 439, syncratic sociability 1074 syntonia 105 tact 1012–13 tactility 49, 129 taxonomy 1010 temperaments Effective 803–11 Effective phenomenology as fundamental states 804–5 Hippocratic medicine 803–4 temporal binding window temporality 389–96, 421–9 affectivity 462–3 anger 673 autism 700–1 Bergson 83 Blankenburg 162–3 depression 132, 431, 432, drug addiction 689, 691 236 286–7 843 243–5 1093–4 831 757 808–9 1115–18 435, 437, 439, 618–26, 628 dysphoria 669–70 eating disorders 532, 534–5, 711, explicit time 432, 433–4 genetic phenomenology 227–8, 232 Heidegger 83, 122, 162, 389, 391, Husserl 83, 122, 389, 391–3, 394, hysteria 655–6, 658–9 implicit time 431–3 insomnia 761 intersubjective temporality 434–5 Kimura 153 Levinas 83–4 modal alterations 202–3 mood disorders 437, 617–33 neuroscience 910–13, 916–22 obsessive-compulsive conditions 643 phenomenology 1047 psychopathology 435–8, 439 Ricoeur 76 schizophrenia 916–20, 1113, 1115–18 self 302–3 subject–object correlation 287 transcendental 930 traumatic 902–3 thanatophobia 642–3, 645, 646 Theory of Mind Mechanism (TOMM), autism thinking see thoughts thought block 446 thought broadcasting 584 alterity 385 phenomenology 931 schizophrenia 729, 731 thought disorders 450–8 decision-making capacity 864, 867 time 435–6 thought insertion (TI) 493, 494, 495, alterity 385 and auditory–verbal hallucinations, relationship between cognitive science 264–5, 266, 267–8 as duplex process 587–9 schizophrenia 729, 731 self 303 time 436 thought pressure 947 thoughts 584–94 agency and ownership of 586–7 comparator model 587 Page 50 of 53 720–1 393–4, 395, 431, 433, 463, 618 395, 431, 432, 617 499, 584–93 590–2, 794n, 269 immunity principle 586–7 becoming loud (GLW, Gedankenlautwerden ) 493, 495 poverty of content of thought 451, 452 thought withdrawal 584 alterity 385 schizophrenia 729, 731 time see temporality touch 49, 129 trainee clinicians see clinicians, formation of transcendence/transcendentalism alterity 381–2 conscience 401, 403, 404 Deleuze Derrida emotion 307 Foucault introspection 250, 251, 254, 255–6, 258 phenomenological psychotherapy 960–1 phenomenology 942 transcendental attitude 210 transcendental idealism 174 transcendental phenomenology 176, 216–23 transcortical aphasia 523 transference 898 transgenderism 553–4, 556, 560, 561–3 transient ischemic attacks (TIA) 572 transitivism 729, 731, 732 transpersonal constructs 929, 933–6 transsexualism 553, 561 trauma 896–906 auditory–verbal hallucinations 798–800 Befindlichkeit 350 borderline personality disorder 676, 835 brain see brain trauma developmental 897–8 dissociation 571 dysphoria 672 psychoanalysis 1045 traumatic grief 548 traumatic sequence 676–8 traumatic system 670 trema psychosis risk 840, 844 schizophrenia 730, 744, 747–50 Triarchic Psychopathy Model 886 Trieste asylum 170, 171 trouble générater Minkowski 107–8, 109 immunity principle 586–7 becoming loud (GLW, Gedankenlautwerden ) 493, 495 poverty of content of thought 451, 452 thought withdrawal 584 alterity 385 schizophrenia 729, 731 time see temporality touch 49, 129 trainee clinicians see clinicians, formation of transcendence/transcendentalism alterity 381–2 conscience 401, 403, 404 Deleuze Derrida emotion 307 Foucault introspection 250, 251, 254, 255–6, 258 phenomenological psychotherapy 960–1 phenomenology 942 transcendental attitude 210 transcendental idealism 174 transcendental phenomenology 176, 216–23 transcortical aphasia 523 transference 898 transgenderism 553–4, 556, 560, 561–3 transient ischemic attacks (TIA) 572 transitivism 729, 731, 732 transpersonal constructs 929, 933–6 transsexualism 553, 561 trauma 896–906 auditory–verbal hallucinations 798–800 Befindlichkeit 350 borderline personality disorder 676, 835 brain see brain trauma developmental 897–8 dissociation 571 dysphoria 672 psychoanalysis 1045 traumatic grief 548 traumatic sequence 676–8 traumatic system 670 trema psychosis risk 840, 844 schizophrenia 730, 744, 747–50 Triarchic Psychopathy Model 886 Trieste asylum 170, 171 trouble générater Minkowski 107–8, 109 psychiatric classification 1019, 1027 schizophrenia 591, 598, 604 Truman symptoms derealization 570 psychosis risk 844, 848 twilight state 423 typification, and psychiatric classification Types Melancholics (TM) 144–6, 806–8 delusions 754, 757–8, 759, 760 pathogenic role 807 unconscious 316–24 Boss 121 as cause 1044–6 discovery of the 1043 Freud 121 Laban 121 psychoanalysis 1043, 1044–6 understanding 407–13 clinicians, formation of 1010–11 dialectic 953, 957–8 eidetic 953, 956–7 empathic 953, 954–6 and explaining, distinction between 407–9 fragile 878–9 genetic see genetic understanding Jasper 96, 97, 99–101 levels of 635 psychoanalysis 1046–8 see also hermeneutics unilateral neglect 426, 427 United States National Institute of Mental Health’s Research Domain Criteria project social life-world 987–1003 Unity of Containment 13 utility (psychiatric classification) 1018 valid consent 859, 861–2, 868 validity phenomenology 928–9 psychiatric classification 1018 transpersonal constructs 935–6 values 354–66 borderline personality disorder 665–6, Schemer 58–9 values-based practice 356–8, 359–60, 362, conscience 404 vascular dementia 448 verbal-acoustic hallucinations 729, 731–2 vertigo 212, 213 vice 400–1 1019–23, 809, 412 1 678–80 364 see also auditory–verbal hallucinations victim role, borderline persons 677 vigilance and absorption, distinction between 443 Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 1096 virtue 400 voices, interpreting 790–2 Weak Central Coherence Theory, autism 699, 705 Williams syndrome 1094–5 “Will to Power” (Nietzsche) 151 Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) 1095 wishes 113–14 women, pathologizing of 53–5 world distancing 199–201 World Health Organization (WHO) intellectual disability 1079, 1080 mental health definition 999 world-view 965 Würzburg School 249, 253–4 victim role, borderline persons 677 vigilance and absorption, distinction between 443 Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 1096 virtue 400 voices, interpreting 790–2 Weak Central Coherence Theory, autism 699, 705 Williams syndrome 1094–5 “Will to Power” (Nietzsche) 151 Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) 1095 wishes 113–14 women, pathologizing of 53–5 world distancing 199–201 World Health Organization (WHO) intellectual disability 1079, 1080 mental health definition 999 world-view 965 Würzburg School 249, 253–4